{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1 \deff28\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}
{\f14\fnil\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05000000000000000000}Wingdings;}{\f23\fmodern\fcharset128\fprq1{\*\panose 02020609040205080304}MS Mincho{\*\falt MS ??};}{\f28\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0603020202020204}Trebuchet MS;}
{\f63\fmodern\fcharset128\fprq1{\*\panose 02020609040205080304}@MS Mincho;}{\f84\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f85\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}{\f87\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}
{\f88\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f89\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f90\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}{\f91\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}
{\f100\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f101\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f103\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f104\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}
{\f105\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}{\f106\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f107\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f270\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 MS Mincho Western{\*\falt MS ??};}
{\f268\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 MS Mincho CE{\*\falt MS ??};}{\f269\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 MS Mincho Cyr{\*\falt MS ??};}{\f271\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 MS Mincho Greek{\*\falt MS ??};}{\f272\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 MS Mincho Tur{\*\falt MS ??};}
{\f275\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 MS Mincho Baltic{\*\falt MS ??};}{\f308\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Trebuchet MS CE;}{\f312\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Trebuchet MS Tur;}{\f590\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1 @MS Mincho Western;}
{\f588\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 @MS Mincho CE;}{\f589\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 @MS Mincho Cyr;}{\f591\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 @MS Mincho Greek;}{\f592\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 @MS Mincho Tur;}{\f595\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 @MS Mincho Baltic;}}
{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 
\sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1
\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 4;}{\s5\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel4\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 5;}{\s6\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel5\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 6;}{\s7\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel6\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \i\f28\fs28\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 7;}{\s8\qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel7\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs16\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 8;}{\s9\qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1
\keepn\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel8\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 9;}{\*\cs10 \additive Default Paragraph Font;}{\*\cs15 \additive \ul\cf2 
\sbasedon10 Hyperlink;}{\s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 \sbasedon0 \snext16 Plain Text;}}{\*\revtbl {Unknown;}}{\info{\title Malignant Self Love - Narcissism Revisited}
{\subject 2nd Revised Printing}{\author Sam Vaknin, Ph.D.}{\operator gbn}{\creatim\yr2001\mo4\dy12\hr2\min47}{\revtim\yr2002\mo2\dy23\hr15\min53}{\version4}{\edmins5}{\nofpages64}{\nofwords31404}{\nofchars179005}{\*\manager Lidija Rangelovska}
{\*\company Narcissus Publications}{\nofcharsws219830}{\vern8299}}\margl1440\margr1440 \widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\makebackup\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\formshade\horzdoc\dgmargin\dghspace120\dgvspace180\dghorigin1440
\dgvorigin1440\dghshow2\dgvshow2\jexpand\viewkind1\viewscale100\pgbrdrhead\pgbrdrfoot\splytwnine\ftnlytwnine\htmautsp\nolnhtadjtbl\useltbaln\alntblind\lytcalctblwd\lyttblrtgr\lnbrkrule \fet0\sectd 
\psz1\linex0\headery706\footery706\endnhere\sectlinegrid360\sectdefaultcl {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang
{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang{\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s16\qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f2\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp1033\langfenp1033 {\fs28\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\af23 \hich\af0\dbch\af23\loch\f0 The Project Gutenberg Etext of }{
\b\fs28\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\af23 \hich\af0\dbch\af23\loch\f0 Malignant Self Love
\par }{\fs28\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\af23 \hich\af0\dbch\af23\loch\f0 by Sam Vaknin}{\loch\af0\hich\af0\dbch\af23 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\dbch\af23 
\par }\pard \s16\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\dbch\af23 \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 #2 in our series by Sam Vaknin
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg Etext, Details Below **
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 **     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 This text is copy\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 righted by Lidija Rangelovska Narcissus Publications -
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 http://samvak.tripod.com
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We encourage you to keep this file, exactly as it is, on your
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 own disk, thereby keeping an electronic path open for future
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 readers.  Please do not remove this header info\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 rmation.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 view the etext. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 information they need to understand what they may \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 and may not
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 do with the etext.
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 **Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 **Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 *****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Information on con\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 tacting Project Gutenberg to get etexts, and
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 further information, is included below.  We need your donations.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Tit\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 le: Malignant Self Love
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Author: Sam Vaknin
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Release Date: November, 2003 [Etext #4663]
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 [Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 [This file was first posted on February 23, 2002]
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Edition: 10
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Language: English
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Character set encoding\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 : ASCII
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Project Gutenberg Etext of Malignant Self Love, by Sam Vaknin
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 *******This file should be named malsl10.txt or malsl10.zip******
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, malsl11.txt
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LE\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 TTER, malsl10a.txt
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We are now trying to release all our etexts one year in advance
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 even years after the official publicati\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 on date.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the st\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ated month.  A
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 and editing by those who wish to do so.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Most people start at our sites at:
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 http://gutenberg.net or
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 http://promo.net/pg
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 These Web sites include award-winning informatio\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 n about Project
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 etexts, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 can get to them as follows, and just downl\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 oad by date.  This is
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 or
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 as it appears in our Newsletters.
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Information about Pro\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ject Gutenberg (one page)
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 searched and analyzed, the co\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 pyright letters written, etc.   Our
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 million dollars per hour in 2001 as we release over 50 new Etext
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 files per month, or 5\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 00 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 4000+
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Files by Dece\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 mber 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 of t\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 hat goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 Etexts.  We need
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 funding, as well as continued efforts by volunteers, to maintain
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 or increase our production and reach our goals.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 to secure\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We need your donations more than ever!
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 As of January, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Florida, Geo\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 rgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennes\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 see,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 and Wyoming.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Please feel free to ask t\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 o check the status of your state.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 In answer to various questions we have received on this:
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 you would like to know i\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 f we have added it since the list you have,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 just ask.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 donations from donors in these states who approach us with an o\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ffer to
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 donate.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 International donations are accepted!  For more information
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 about donations, please view http://promo.net/pg/donation.html
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We accept PayPal, as well as donation s via NetworkForGood.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Donation checks should be sent to:
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Project Gu\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 tenberg Literary Archive Foundation
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 PMB 113
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 1739 University Ave.
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Oxford, MS 38655-4109
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 [Employee Identific\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ation Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fundraising
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 made and fundraising will begin in the additional states.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We need you\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 r donations more than ever!
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ***
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 you can always email directly to:
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 We would prefer to send you information by email.
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 **Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 (Three Pages)
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ***START** SMALL PRINT! for COPYRIGHT PROTECTED ETEXTS ***
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 TITLE AND COPYRIGHT NOTICE:
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Project Gutenberg Etext of Malignant Self Love
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 by Sam Vaknin
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 This text is\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  copyrighted by Lidija Rangelovska Narcissus Publications -
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 http://samvak.tripod.com
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 This etext is distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart through the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project") under the "Project
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Gutenberg" trademark and with the\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  permission of the etext's
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 copyright owner.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 any commercial products without permission.
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 LICENSE
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 You can (and are encouraged!) to copy and distribute this
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Project Gutenberg-tm etext. \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  Since, unlike many other of the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Project's etexts, it is copyright protected, and since the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 materials and methods you use will effect the Project's reputation,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 your right to copy and distribute it is limited by the copyright
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 laws and by the conditions \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 of this "Small Print!" statement.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2   [A]  ALL COPIES: You may distribute copies of this etext
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 electronically or on any machine readable medium now known
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 or hereafter discovered so long as you:
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2      (1)  Honor the refund and replacement provisions of\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  this
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 "Small Print!" statement; and
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2      (2)  Pay a royalty to the Foundation of 20% of the gross
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 profits you derive calculated using the method you already use
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you don't derive
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 profits, no royalty is due.  Ro\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 yalties are payable to "Project
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation" within the 60 days
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 following each date you prepare (or were legally required
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 to prepare) your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2   [B]  EXACT AND MODIFIED COPIES: The cop\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ies you distribute
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 must either be exact copies of this etext, including this
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Small Print statement, or can be in binary, compressed, mark-
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 up, or proprietary form (including any form resulting from
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 word processing or hypertext software), so long as *EI\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 THER*:
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2      (1)  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 does *not* contain characters other than those intended by the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) and
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 underline (_) characters may be used to convey punctuation
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 i\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ntended by the author, and additional characters may be used
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 to indicate hypertext links; OR
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2      (2)  The etext is readily convertible by the reader at no
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form by the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 program that displays the etext (as\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  is the case, for instance,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 with most word processors); OR
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2      (3)  You provide or agree to provide on request at no
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the etext in plain
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ASCII.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 This etext may cont\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 ain a "Defect" in the form of incomplete,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 or other infringement, a defective or damaged disk, computer
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 virus, or codes that damage or cannot be read by your
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 equipment.  But for the "Right of\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  Replacement or Refund"
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 described below, the Project (and any other party you may
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext)
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 disclaims all liability to you for damages, costs and
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 expenses, including legal fees, and YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FO\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 R
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 If you discover a Defect\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2  in this etext within 90 days of
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 on a physical medium, you must return \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 it with your note, and
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 receive it electronically.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWI\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 SE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Some states d\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 o not allow disclaimers of
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 consequential damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 may not apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 INDEMNITY
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 You will indemnify and hold Michael H\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 art and the Foundation,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 legal fees, that arise directly or indirectl\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 y from any of the
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 [2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 or [3] any Defect.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Project Gutenberg is dedicated \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 to increasing the number of
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 in machine readable form.
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 Money sho\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 uld be paid to the:
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 hart@pobox.com
\par 
\par 
\par \hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 *SMALL PRINT! Ver.12.12.00 FOR COPYRIGHT PRO\hich\af2\dbch\af23\loch\f2 TECTED ETEXTS*END*
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs20\lang1033\langfe1033\loch\af2\hich\af2\dbch\af23\langnp1033 
\par \page }{
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs92 Malignant
\par Self Love
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs36 Narcissism Revisited
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs20 1}{\i\f0\fs20\super st}{\i\f0\fs20  EDITION
\par }{\i\f0\fs24 2}{\i\f0\fs24\super nd}{\i\f0\fs24  Revised Printing
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\fs36 Sam Vaknin, Ph.D.
\par }{\fs14 The Author is NOT a Mental Health Professional.
\par The Author is certified in Counselling Techniques.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Editing and Design:
\par }{\b\fs20 Lidija Rangelovska
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs24 Narcissus Publications, Prague 2001\page }{
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\fs16 \'a9 1999, 2001 Copyright Lidija Rangelovska
\par All rights reserved. This book, or any part thereof, may not be used or reproduced in any manner without written permission from:
\par Lidija Rangelovska \endash  write to:
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\b\fs16  HYPERLINK "mailto:palma@unet.com.mk" }{\b\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b020000001700000012000000700061006c006d006100400075006e00650074002e0063006f006d002e006d006b000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b320000006d00610069006c0074006f003a00700061006c006d006100400075006e00650074002e0063006f006d00
2e006d006b00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\b\fs16\ul\cf2 palma@unet.com.mk}}}{\b\fs16  }{\fs16 or to
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\b\fs16  HYPERLINK "mailto:samvak@visto.com" }{\b\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b020000001700000011000000730061006d00760061006b00400076006900730074006f002e0063006f006d000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b300000006d00610069006c0074006f003a00730061006d00760061006b00400076006900730074006f002e0063006f00
6d00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\b\fs16\ul\cf2 samvak@visto.com}}}{\b\fs16 
\par }{\fs16 
\par All rights for this book are for sale.
\par Literary agents and publishers, please contact Lidija Rangelovska.
\par 
\par }\trowd \trgaph108\trrh1275\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrv\brdrs\brdrw10 \trftsWidth1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 
\clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth4920 \cellx4920\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs16 
To get FREE updates of this book JOIN the Narcissistic Abuse Study List.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs16 To JOIN, visit our web site:
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\b\fs16  HYPERLINK "http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/narclist.html" }{\b\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002e00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f006e006100720063006c006900730074002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9ba
ce118c8200aa004ba90b5c00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f006e006100720063006c006900730074002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\b\fs16\ul\cf2 
http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/narclist.html}}}{\fs16  or
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\b\fs16  HYPERLINK "http://samvak.tripod.com/narclist.html" }{\b\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002700000068007400740070003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f006e006100720063006c006900730074002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b4e000000
68007400740070003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f006e006100720063006c006900730074002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\b\fs16\ul\cf2 http://samvak.tripod.com/narclist.html}}}{\b\fs16  or
\par }{\field\fldedit{\*\fldinst {\b  HYPERLINK "http://groups.yahoo.com/group/narcissisticabuse" }{\b {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000003000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b6000000068007400740070003a002f002f00670072006f007500700073002e007900610068006f006f002e0063006f006d002f00670072006f00750070002f006e006100720063006900730073006900730074006900
6300610062007500730065000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\b\ul\cf2 http://groups.yahoo.com/group/narcissisticabuse}}}{\b\fs16 
\par \cell }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\intbl\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0 {\fs16 \trowd \trgaph108\trrh1275\trbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrh\brdrs\brdrw10 \trbrdrv
\brdrs\brdrw10 \trftsWidth1\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddfr3 \clvertalt\clbrdrt\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrl\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw10 \clbrdrr\brdrs\brdrw10 \cltxlrtb\clftsWidth3\clwWidth4920 \cellx4920\row }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1
\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 Visit the Author's web sites:
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\field{\*\fldinst {\fs16  HYPERLINK "http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/index.html" }{\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002b00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f0069006e006400650078002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa
004ba90b5600000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f0069006e006400650078002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\fs16\ul\cf2 
http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/index.html}}}{\fs16 
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs16  HYPERLINK "http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/faq1.html" }{\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002a00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f0066006100710031002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004b
a90b5400000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f0066006100710031002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\fs16\ul\cf2 http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/faq1.html
}}}{\fs16 
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs16  HYPERLINK "http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/archive01.html" }{\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002f00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f006100720063006800690076006500300031002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79
f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b5e00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f006100720063006800690076006500300031002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\fs16\ul\cf2 
http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/archive01.html}}}{\fs16 
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\fs16  HYPERLINK "http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/thebook.html" }{\fs16 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002d00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f0074006800650062006f006f006b002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9bace11
8c8200aa004ba90b5a00000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e00670065006f006300690074006900650073002e0063006f006d002f00760061006b00730061006d002f0074006800650062006f006f006b002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\fs16\ul\cf2 http://www.geoc
ities.com/vaksam/thebook.html}}}{\fs16 
\par 
\par 
\par }{\b\fs16 ISBN: 80-238-3384-7
\par }{\fs16 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 Printed by:
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 BATO & DIVAJN Corporation, Graphic Center, Skopje
\par REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
\par }{\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {C O N T E N T S
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sa120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Foreword
\par Introduction
\par The Narcissistic Personality Disorder
\par }\pard \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Frequently Asked Questions
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissism \endash  The Disorder
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-964\li964\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin964\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i FAQ # 1:}{\tab }{\kerning28 An Overview of the }{Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 2:}{\tab Self-Love and Narcissism
\par }{\i FAQ # 3:}{\tab Self-Defeating and Self-Destructive Behaviours
\par }{\i FAQ # 4:}{\tab Grandiose Fantasies
\par }{\i FAQ # 5:}{\tab Depression and the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 6:}{\tab }{\kerning28 Narcissistic Rage}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 7:}{\tab Gender and the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 8:}{\tab Homosexual Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 9:}{\tab Addiction to Fame and Celebrity
\par }{\i FAQ # 10:}{\tab }{\kerning28 The Narcissist's Reaction to }{Deficient Narcissistic Supply
\par }{\i FAQ # 11:}{\tab The Compulsive Acts of the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 12:}{\tab The Unstable Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 13:}{\tab Do Narcissists Have Emotions?
\par }{\i FAQ # 14:}{\tab The Inappropriate Affect
\par }{\i FAQ # 15:}{\tab The Narcissist as a Sadist
\par }{\i FAQ # 16:}{\tab Multiple Grandiosity
\par }{\i FAQ # 17:}{\tab False Modesty
\par }{\i FAQ # 18:}{\tab Warped Reality and Retroactive Emotional Content
\par }{\i FAQ # 19:}{\tab Narcissistic Signal, Stimulus and Hibernation Mini-Cycles
\par }{\i FAQ # 20:}{\tab The Narcissistic Pendulum and the Pathological Narcissistic Space
\par }{\i FAQ # 21:}{\tab }{\kerning28 The Inanimate as a Source of Narcissistic Supply (}{Narcissistic Branding and Narcissistic Contagion)
\par }{\i FAQ # 22:}{\tab The Dual Role of the False Self
\par }{\i FAQ # 23:}{\tab The Stripped Ego
\par }{\i FAQ # 24:}{\tab The Split-off Ego
\par }{\i FAQ # 25:}{\tab The Serious Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 26:}{\tab Narcissists, Disagreements and Criticism
\par }{\i FAQ # 27:}{\tab Narcissistic Humiliation
\par }{\i FAQ # 28:}{\tab The Midlife Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 29:}{\tab The Narcissist and Introspection
\par }{\i FAQ # 30:}{\tab Getting Better
\par }{\i FAQ # 31:}{\tab Can a Narcissist Help Himself?
\par }{\i FAQ # 32:}{\tab Reconditioning the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 33:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Treatment Modalities and Therapies}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 34:}{\tab Narcissists, Paranoiacs and Psychotherapists
\par }{\i FAQ # 35:}{\tab }{\kerning28 T}{he Development of the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 36:}{\tab The Narcissist's Mother
\par }{\i FAQ # 37:}{\tab The Inverted Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 38:}{\tab Narcissists, Inverted Narcissists and Schizoids
\par }{\i FAQ # 39:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Narcissists and Chemical Imbalances}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 40:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Myths about Narcissism}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 41:}{\tab Narcissism \endash  The Psychopathological Default
\par }{\i FAQ # 42:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Narcissism with Other Mental Health Disorders
\par }\pard \qj \li964\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin964\itap0 {\cgrid0 (Co-Morbidity and Dual Diagnosis)}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-964\li964\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin964\itap0 {\i FAQ # 43:}{\tab Eating Disorders and the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 44:}{\tab Can the Narcissist have a Meaningful Life?
\par }{\i FAQ # 45:}{\tab A Case Study
\par }{\i FAQ # 46:}{\tab The Narcissist's Reactions to this Text
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissism and Society
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-964\li964\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin964\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i FAQ # 47:}{\tab A Dream Interpreted
\par }{\i FAQ # 48:}{\tab How to Recognise a Narcissist?
\par }{\i FAQ # 49:}{\tab Interacting with a Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 50:}{\tab Exploitation by a Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 51:}{\tab The Narcissist's Victims
\par }{\i FAQ # 52:}{\tab Narcissism by Proxy
\par }{\i FAQ # 53:}{\tab Narcissists in Positions of Authority
\par }{\i FAQ # 54:}{\tab The Narcissist and Social Institutions
\par }{\i FAQ # 55:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 The Narcissist in Court}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 56:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 The Narcissist in a Workplace}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 57:}{\tab Responsibility and Other Matters
\par }{\i FAQ # 58:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 The Accountable Narcissist}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 59:}{\tab Crime and Punishment: The Never Repenting Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 60:}{\tab Is the Narcissist Ever Sorry?
\par }{\i FAQ # 61:}{\tab A Letter about Trust
\par }{\i FAQ # 62:}{\tab The Guilt of Others
\par }{\i FAQ # 63:}{\tab Narcissistic Confinement
\par }{\i FAQ # 64:}{\tab Narcissistic Allocation
\par }{\i FAQ # 65:}{\tab Narcissistic Immunity
\par }{\i FAQ # 66:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Narcissists, Love and Healing}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 67:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Vindictive Narcissists}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 68:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Narcissists, Narcissistic Supply and Sources of Supply}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissists and Family
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-964\li964\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin964\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i FAQ # 69:}{\tab How to Cope with a Narcissist?
\par }{\i FAQ # 70:}{\tab }{\cgrid0 Narcissists and Women}{
\par }{\i FAQ # 71:}{\tab The Spouse/Mate/Partner of the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 72:}{\tab Investing in a Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 73:}{\tab }{\kerning28 The Double Reflection \endash  }{Narcissistic Couples and Narcissistic Types
\par }{\i FAQ # 74:}{\tab Narcissistic Parents
\par }{\i FAQ # 75:}{\tab The Narcissist and His Family
\par }{\i FAQ # 76:}{\tab Narcissists, Sex and Fidelity
\par }{\i FAQ # 77:}{\tab The Extra-Marital Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 78:}{\tab Mourning the Narcissist
\par }{\i FAQ # 79:}{ \tab }{\cgrid0 Surviving the Narcissist}{\i  }{
\par }{\i FAQ # 80:}{\tab The Dead Parents
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Essay
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-1320\li1320\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin1320\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i Introduction:}{\tab The Soul of a Narcissist \endash  The State of the Art

\par }{\i Chapter One:}{\tab Being Special
\par }{\i Chapter Two:}{\tab Uniqueness and Intimacy
\par }{\i Chapter Three:}{\tab The Workings of a Narcissist \endash  A Phenomenology
\par }{\i Chapter Four:}{\tab The Tortured Self \endash  The Inner World of the Narcissist
\par }{\i Chapter Five:}{\tab The Concept of Narcissistic Supply
\par }{\i Chapter Six:}{\tab The Concepts of Narcissistic Accumulation and Narcissistic Regulation
\par }{\i Chapter Seven:}{\tab The Emotional Involvement Preventive Measures
\par }{\i Chapter Eight:}{\tab Loss of Control of Grandiosity
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Author
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs92 Malignant
\par Self Love
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs36 Narcissism Revisited
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\fs28 The Narcissistic Personality Disorder
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {A Primer on Narcissism
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissism (n. sing.)
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
A pattern of traits and behaviours which signify infatuation and obsession with one's self to the exclusion of all others and the egotistic and ruthless pursuit of one's gratification, dominance and ambition.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Narcissism is named after the ancient Greek myt
h of Narcissus who was a handsome Greek youth who rejected the desperate advances of the nymph Echo. In punishment of his cruelty, he was doomed to fall in love with his own reflection in a pool of water. Unable to consummate his love, he pined away and c
hanged into the flower that bears his name to this very day.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {What is NPD (Narcissistic Personality Disorder)?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD) has been recognised as a separate mental health disorder in the third edition of the Diagnostic and Sta
tistics Manual (DSM) in 1980. Its diagnostic criteria and their interpretation have undergone a major revision in the DSM-III-R [1987] and were substantially revamped in the DSM-IV in 1994. The European ICD-10 basically contains identical language.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {An all-
pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behaviour), need for admiration or adulation and lack of empathy, usually beginning by early adulthood and present in various contexts. Five (or more) of the following criteria must be met:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Feels grandiose 
and self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents to the point of lying, demands to be recognised as superior without commensurate achievements);
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Is obsessed with fantasies of unlimited success, fame, fearsome power or omnipotence, unequall
ed brilliance (the cerebral narcissist), bodily beauty or sexual performance (the somatic narcissist), or ideal, everlasting, all-conquering love or passion;
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Firmly convinced that he or she is unique and, being special, can only be understood by, should only be treated by, or associate with, other special or unique, or high-status people (or institutions);
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Requires excessive admiration, adulation, attention and affirmation \endash  or, failing that, wishes to be feared and to be notorious (Narcissistic Supply);
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Feels entitled. Expects unreasonable or special and favourable priority treatment. Demands automatic and full compliance with his or her expectations;
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Is "interpersonally exploitative", i.e., uses others to achieve his or her own ends;
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Devoid of empathy. Is unable or unwilling to identify with or acknowledge the feelings and needs of others;
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Constantly envious of others or believes that they feel the same about him or her;
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet }{\tab Arrogant, haughty behaviours or attitudes coupled with rage when frustrated, contradicted, or confronted.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The language in the criteria above is based on or summarised from:
\par American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV. 4th ed. Washington [1994]
\par Vaknin, Sam. Malignant Self-Love \endash  Narcissism Revisited. Revised ed. Prague and Skopje, Narcissus Publications [1999, 2001]
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {More Data About Pathological Narcissists
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\bullet \tab Most narcissists (75%) are men.
\par \bullet \tab NPD (=the Narcissistic Personality Disorder) is one of a "family" of personality disorders (formerly known as "Cluster B"). Other members: Borderline PD, Antisocial PD and Histrionic PD.
\par \bullet \tab NPD is often diagnosed with other mental health disorders ("co-morbidity") \endash  or with substance abuse, or impulsive and reckless behaviours ("dual diagnosis").
\par \bullet \tab NPD is new [1980] mental health category in the Diagnostic and Statistics Manual (DSM).
\par \bullet \tab There is only scant research regarding narcissism. But what there is has not demonstrated any ethnic, social, cultural, economic, genetic, or professional predilection to NPD.
\par \bullet \tab It is estimated that 0.7-1% of the general population suffer from NPD.
\par \bullet \tab Pathological narcissism was first described in detail by Freud. Other major contributors are: Klein, Horney, Kohut, Kernberg, Millon, Roningstam, Gunderson, Hare.
\par \bullet \tab The onset of narcissism is in infancy, childhood and early adolescence. It is commonly attributed to childhood abuse and trauma inflicted by parents, authority figures, or even peers.
\par \bullet \tab There is a whole range of narcissistic reactions \endash  from the mild, reactive and transient to the permanent personality disorder.
\par \bullet \tab Narcissists are either "cerebral" (derive their Narcissistic Supply from their intelligence or academic achievements) \endash  or "somatic" (derive their Narcissistic Supply fro
m their physique, exercise, physical or sexual prowess and "conquests").
\par \bullet \tab Narcissists are either "classic" \endash  see definition below \endash  or they are "compensatory", or "inverted" \endash  see definitions in FAQ 37: The Inverted Narcissist.
\par \bullet \tab NPD is treated in talk th
erapy (psychodynamic or cognitive-behavioural). The prognosis for an adult narcissist is poor, though his adaptation to life and to others can improve with treatment. Medication is applied to side effects and behaviours (such as mood or affect disorders a
nd obsession-compulsion) \endash  usually with some success.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Bibliography
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \fi-284\li284\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin284\itap0 {1.\tab Alford, C. Fred. Narcissism: Socrates, the Frankfurt School and Psychoanalytic Theory. New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 1988

\par 2.\tab Devereux, George. Basic Problems of Ethno-Psychiatry. University of Chicago Press, 1980
\par 3.\tab Fairbairn, W. R. D. An Object Relations Theory of the Personality. New York, Basic Books, 1954
\par 4.\tab Freud S. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality [1905]. Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Vol. 7. London, Hogarth Press, 1964
\par 5.\tab Freud, S. On Narcissism. Standard Ed. Vol. 14, pp. 73-107
\par 6.\tab Goldman, Howard H. (Ed.). Review of General Psychiatry. 4th Ed. London, Prentice Hall International, 1995
\par 7.\tab Golomb, Elan. Trapped in the Mirror: Adult Children of Narcissists in Their Struggle for Self. Quill, 1995
\par 8.\tab Greenberg, Jay R. and Mitchell, Stephen A. Object Relations in Psychoanalytic Theory. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1983
\par 9.\tab Grunberger, Bela. Narcissism: Psychoanalytic Essays. New York, International Universities Press, 1979
\par 10.\tab Guntrip, Harry. Personality Structure and Human Interaction. New York, International Universities Press, 1961
\par 11.\tab Horowitz M. J. Sliding Meanings: A Defence against Threat in Narcissistic Personalities. International Journal of Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 1975; 4:167
\par 12.\tab Horovitz M. J. Stress Response Syndromes: PTSD, Grief and Adjustment Disorders. 3rd Ed. New York, NY University Press, 1998
\par 13.\tab Jacobson, Edith. The Self and the Object World. New York, International Universities Press, 1964
\par 14.\tab Jung, C.G. Collected Works. G. Adler, M. Fordham and H. Read (Eds.). 21 volumes. Princeton University Press, 1960-1983
\par 15.\tab Kernberg O. Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissism. New York, Jason Aronson, 1975
\par 16.\tab Klein, Melanie. The Writings of Melanie Klein. Roger Money-Kyrle (Ed.). 4 Vols. New York, Free Press, 1964-75
\par 17.\tab Kohut H. The Chicago Institute Lectures 1972-1976. Marian and Paul Tolpin (Eds.). Analytic Press, 1998
\par 18.\tab Kohut M. The Analysis of the Self. New York, International Universities Press, 1971
\par 19.\tab Lasch, Christopher. The Culture of Narcissism. New York, Warner Books, 1979
\par 20.\tab Levine, J. D., and Weiss, Rona H. The Dynamics and Treatment of Alcoholism. Jason Aronson, 1994
\par 21.\tab Lowen, Alexander. Narcissism: Denial of the True Self. Touchstone Books, 1997
\par 22.\tab Millon, Theodore (and Roger D. Davis, contributor). Disorders of Personality: DSM-IV and Beyond. 2nd ed. New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1995
\par 23.\tab Millon, Theodore. Personality Disorders in Modern Life. New York, John Wiley and Sons, 2000
\par 24.\tab Riso, Don Richard. Personality Types: Using the Enneagram for Self-Discovery. Boston: Houghton Mifflin 1987
\par 25.\tab Roningstam, Elsa F. (Ed.). Disorders of Narcissism: Diagnostic, Clinical, and Empirical Implications. American Psychiatric Press, 1998
\par 26.\tab Rothstein, Arnold. The Narcissistic Pursuit of Reflection. 2nd revised Ed. New York, International Universities Press, 1984
\par 27.\tab Schwartz, Lester. Narcissistic Personality Disorders \endash  A Clinical Discussion. Journal of American Psychoanalytic Association \endash  22 [1974]: 292-305
\par 28.\tab Salant-Schwartz, Nathan. Narcissism and Character Transformation. Inner City Books, 1985 \endash  pp. 90-91
\par 29.\tab Stern, Daniel. The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View from Psychoanalysis and Developmental Psychology. New York, Basic Books, 1985
\par 30.\tab Vaknin, Sam. Malignant Self-Love \endash  Narcissism Revisited. Skopje and Prague, Narcissus Publications, 1999, 2001
\par 31.\tab Zweig, Paul. The Heresy of Self-Love: A Study of Subversive Individualism. New York, Basic Books, 1968
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs92 Malignant
\par Self Love
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs36 Narcissism Revisited
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\f0\fs28 Frequently Asked Questions
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 37
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Inverted Narcissist
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i With contributions by: Alice Ratzlaff (*) and
\par The members of the Narcissism List
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\caps\fs15 The Clinical Picture and Developmental Roots \endash  
\par Opening Remarks
\par }\pard \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Terminology
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Co-dependents
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 People who depend on other people for their emotional gratification an
d the performance of }{Ego}{\cgrid0 
 or daily functions. They are needy, demanding, submissive. They fear abandonment, cling and display immature behaviours in their effort to maintain the "relationship" with their companion or mate upon whom they depend. No matter wh
at abuse is inflicted upon them \endash  they remain in the relationship.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 See also the definition of the Dependent Personality Disorder in the DSM-IV.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Inverted Narcissist
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
Previously called "covert narcissist", this is a co-dependent who depends exclusively on narcissists (narcissist-co-dependent). If you live with a narcissist, have a relationship with one, are married to one, work with a narcissist, etc. \endash 
 it does NOT mean that you are an inverted narcissist.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 To "qualify" as an inverted narcissist \endash  you must WANT
 to be in a relationship with a narcissist, regardless of any abuse inflicted on you by him/her. You must ACTIVELY seek relationships with narcissists \endash  and ONLY with narcissists \endash 
 no matter what your (bitter and traumatic) past experience has been. You must feel EMPTY and UNHAPPY in relationships with ANY OTHER kind of person. Only THEN \endash  AND if you satisfy the other diagnostic criteria of a Dependent Personality Disorder 
\endash  can you be safely labelled an "inverted narcissist".}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Introduction
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The DSM-IV uses 9
 criteria to define the NPD. It is sufficient to possess 5 of them to "qualify" as a narcissist. Thus, theoretically, it is possible to be NPD WITHOUT being grandiose. Many researchers (Alexander Lowen, Jeffrey Satinover, Theodore Millon and others) sugge
sted a "taxonomy" of pathological narcissism. They divided narcissists to sub-groups (very much as I did with my somatic versus cerebral narcissist dichotomy \endash 
 SV). Lowen, for instance, talks about the "phallic" narcissist versus others. Satinover makes a very important distinction between narcissists who were raised by abusive parents \endash 
 and those who were raised by doting and smothering or domineering mothers. [See an expansion of the Satinover classification in FAQ 36]
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Glenn O. Gabbard in "Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice" [The DSM-IV Edition's. Comments on Cluster B Personality Disorders \endash 
 Narcissistic. American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994] we find this:
\par }{\i "...what definitive criteria can be used to differentiate healthy from pathological narcissism? The time honoured criteria of psychological health \endash  to love and to work \endash  are only partly useful in answering this question."}{
\par }{\i "An individual's work history may provide little help in making the distinction. Highly disturbed narcissistic individual
s may find extraordinary success in certain professions, such as big business, the arts, politics, the entertainment industry, athletics and televangelism field. In some cases, however, narcissistic pathology may be reflected in a superficial quality to o
ne's professional interests, as though achievement in and acclaim are more important than mastery of the field itself.}{
\par }{\i Pathological forms of narcissism are more easily identified by the quality of the individual's relationships.}{
\par }{\i One tragedy affecting these 
people is their inability to love. Healthy interpersonal relationships can be recognised by qualities such as empathy and concern for the feelings of others, a genuine interest in the ideas of others, the ability to tolerate ambivalence in long-term relat
i
onships without giving up, and a capacity to acknowledge one's own contribution to interpersonal conflicts. People who are characterised by these qualities may at times use others to gratify their own needs, but the tendency occurs in the broader context 
o
f sensitive interpersonal relatedness rather than as a pervasive style of dealing with other people. One the other hand, the person with a Narcissistic Personality Disorder approaches people as objects to be used up and discarded according to his or her n
eeds, without regard for their feelings.
\par People are not viewed as having a separate existence or as having needs of their own. The individual with a Narcissistic Personality Disorder frequently ends a relationship after a short time, usually when the other 
person begins to make demands stemming from for his or her own needs. Most importantly, such relationships clearly do not 'work' in terms of the narcissist's ability to maintain his or her own sense of self-esteem."
\par "...These criteria [the DSM-IV's \endash  SV] identify a certain kind of narcissistic patient \endash 
 specifically, the arrogant, boastful, 'noisy' individual who demands to be in the spotlight. However, they fail to characterise the shy, quietly grandiose, narcissistic individual whose extreme sensitivity t
o slights leads to an assiduous avoidance of the spotlight."}{
\par The DSM-III-R alluded to at least TWO TYPES of narcissists, but the DSM-IV committee chose to delete this: }{\i "...included criterion, 'reacts to criticism with feelings of rage, shame, or humiliatio
n (even not if expressed)' due to lack of 'specificity'."}{
\par Other theoreticians, clinicians and researchers similarly suggested a division between "the oblivious narcissist" (a.k.a. overt) and "the hypervigilant narcissist" (a.k.a. covert).
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Compensatory versus the Classic Narcissist
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
Another interesting distinction, suggested by Dave Kelly in his excellent PTYPES web site (http://www.ptypes.com) is between the Compensatory Type NPD and the Classic NPD [DSM-IV type]: http://www.geocities.com/ptyres/compensatory-narpd.html
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Here are the }{\b\i Compensatory NPD criteria}{ according to Dave Kelly:
\par }{\i 
"Personality Types proposes Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Disorder as a pervasive pattern of unstable, covert narcissistic behaviours that derive from an underlying sense of insecurity and weakness rather than from genuine feelings of self-confide
nce and high self-esteem, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by six (or more) of the criteria below.}{
\par }{\i The basic trait of the Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Type is a pattern of overtly narcissistic behaviou
rs (that) derive from an underlying sense of insecurity and weakness, rather than from genuine feelings of self-confidence and high self-esteem."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Type:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\bullet \tab Seeks to create an illusion of superiority and to build up a
n image of high self-worth [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab Strives for recognition and prestige to compensate for the lack of a feeling of self-worth;
\par \bullet \tab May }{\i "acquire a deprecatory attitude in which the achievements of others are ridiculed and degraded"}{ [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab Has persistent aspirations for glory and status [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab Has a tendency to exaggerate and boast [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab Is sensitive to how others react to him, watches and listens carefully for critical judgement, and feels slighted by disapproval [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab }{\i "Is prone to feel shamed and humiliated and especially (anxious) and vulnerable to the judgements of others"}{ [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab Covers up a sense of inadequacy and deficiency with pseudo-arrogance and pseudo-grandiosity [Millon];
\par \bullet \tab Has a tendency to periodic hypochondria [Forman];
\par \bullet \tab Alternates between feelings of emptiness and deadness and states of excitement and excess energy [Forman];
\par \bullet \tab Entertains fantasies of greatness, constantly striving for perfection, genius, or stardom [Forman];
\par \bullet \tab Has a history of searching for an idealised partner and has an intense need for affirmation and confirmation in relationships [Forman];
\par \bullet \tab Frequently entertains a wishful, exaggerated and unrealistic concept of himself, which he can't possibly measure up to [Reich];
\par \bullet \tab Produces (too quickly) work not up to the level of his abilities because of an overwhelmingly strong need for the immediate gratification of success [Reich];
\par \bullet \tab Is touchy, quick to take offence at the slightest provocation, continually anticipating attack and danger, reacting with anger and fantasies of revenge when he feels himself frustrated in his need for constant admiration [Reich];
\par \bullet \tab Is self-conscious, due to a dependence on approval from others [Reich];
\par \bullet \tab Suffers regularly from repetitive oscillations of self-esteem [Reich];
\par \bullet \tab Seeks to undo feelings of inadequacy by forcing everyone's attention and admiration upon himself [Reich];
\par \bullet \tab May react with self-contempt and depression to the lack of fulfilment of his grandiose expectations [Riso].
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Sources:
\par Forman, Max. Narcissistic Disorders and the Oedipal Fixations. In Feldstein, J.J. (Ed.), The Annual of Psychoanalysis. Volume IV. New York: International Universities [1976] pp. 65-92.
\par Millon, Theodore, and Roger D. Davis. Disorders of Personality: DSM-IV and Beyond. 2nd Ed. New York: Wiley, [1996] pp. 411-12.
\par Reich, Annie, [1986]. Pathological Forms of Self-Esteem Regulation. In Morrison, A. P., (Ed.), Essential Papers on Narcissism. pp. 44-60. Reprint from 1960. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child. Volume 15, pp. 205-32.
\par Riso, Don Richard. Personality Types: Using the Enneagram for Self-Discovery. Boston: Houghton Mifflin [1987] pp. 102-3.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Speculative Diagnostic Criteria for
\par }\pard \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Disorder
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {A pervasive pattern of se
lf-inflation, pseudo-confidence, exhibitionism, and strivings for prestige, that compensates for feelings of inadequacy and low self-esteem, as indicated by the following:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\bullet \tab Pseudo-confidence compensating for an underlying condition of insecurity and feelings of helplessness;
\par \bullet \tab Pretentiousness, self-inflation;
\par \bullet \tab Exhibitionism in the pursuit of attention, recognition, and glory;
\par \bullet \tab Strivings for prestige to enhance self-esteem;
\par \bullet \tab Deceitfulness and manipulativeness in the service of maintaining feelings of superiority;
\par \bullet \tab Idealisation in relationships;
\par \bullet \tab Fragmentation of the self: feelings of emptiness and deadness;
\par \bullet \tab A proud, hubristic disposition;
\par \bullet \tab Hypochondriasis;
\par \bullet \tab Substance abuse;
\par \bullet \tab Self-destructiveness.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Disorder corre
sponds to Ernest Jones' narcissistic "God Complex", Annie Reich's "Compensatory Narcissism", Heinz Kohut's "Narcissistic Personality Disorder", and Theodore Millon's "Compensatory Narcissist".
\par Millon, Theodore, and Roger D. Davis. Disorders of Personality: DSM-IV and Beyond. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 1996. 411-12.
\par Compare this to the classic type:
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissistic Personality Type
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The basic trait of the Narcissistic Personality Type is a pattern of grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The Narcissistic Personality Type:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\bullet \tab Reacts to criticism with feelings of rage, shame, or humiliation;
\par \bullet \tab Is interpersonally exploitive: takes advantage of others to achieve his own ends;
\par \bullet \tab Has a grandiose sense of self-importance;
\par \bullet \tab Believes that his problems are unique and can be understood only by other special people;
\par \bullet \tab Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love;
\par \bullet \tab Has a sense of entitlement: an unreasonable expectation of especially favourable treatment;
\par \bullet \tab Requires much attention and admiration of others;
\par \bullet \tab Lacks empathy: fails to recognise and experience how others feel;
\par \bullet \tab Is preoccupied with feelings of envy.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {This is mainly the DSM-III-R view. Pay attention to the not so subtle changes in the DSM-IV \endash  SV:
\par The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [American Psychiatric Association. DSM-IV. 4th ed. Washington, 1994] describes Narcissistic Personality Disorder as a pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behaviour), need for admiration
, and lack of empathy, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\bullet \tab Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates achievements and talents, expects to be recognised as su
perior without commensurate achievements);
\par \bullet \tab Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance, beauty, or ideal love;
\par \bullet \tab Believes that he or she is "special" and unique and can only be understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status people (or institutions);
\par \bullet \tab Requires excessive admiration;
\par \bullet \tab Has a sense of entitlement, i.e., unreasonable expectations of especially favourable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her expectations;
\par \bullet \tab Is interpersonally exploitive, i.e., takes advantage of others to achieve his or her own ends;
\par \bullet \tab Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognise or identify with the feelings and needs of others;
\par \bullet \tab Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious of him or her;
\par \bullet \tab Shows arrogant, haughty behaviours or attitudes.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Summarised from: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV. 4th Ed. Washington [1994]
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Inverted Narcissist
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {It is clear that there is, indeed, an hitherto neglec
ted type of narcissist. It is the "self-effacing" or "introverted" narcissist. We call it the Inverted Narcissist (hereinafter: IN). Others call it "narcissist-codependent" or "N-magnet".
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 This is a narcissist who, in many respects, is the mirror image of t
he "classical" narcissist. No one is sure why. The psychodynamics of such a narcissist are not clear, nor are his developmental roots. Perhaps he is the product of an overweening Primary}{
 Object or caregiver. Perhaps excessive abuse leads to the repression of even the narcissistic and other defence mechanisms. Perhaps the parents suppress every manifestation of grandiosity (very common in early childhood) and of narcissism \endash 
 so that the narcissistic defence mechanism is "inverted" and internalised in this unusual form.
\par These narcissists are self-effacing, sensitive, emotionally fragile, sometimes socially phobic. They import all their self-esteem and sense of self-worth from the outside (others), are pathologically envious (a transformation of aggression), ar
e likely to intermittently engage in aggressive/violent behaviours, are more emotionally labile that the classic narcissist, etc.
\par We can, therefore talk about three "basic" types of narcissists:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-227\li397\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin397\itap0 {1.\tab }{\i The offspring of neglecting parents}{ \endash  They resort to narci
ssism as the predominant object relation (with themselves as the exclusive object).
\par 2.\tab }{\i The offspring of doting or domineering parents (often narcissists themselves)}{ \endash  They internalised their parents' voices in the form of a sadistic, ideal, immature Supere
go and spend their lives trying to be perfect, omnipotent, omniscient and to be judged "a success" by these parent-images and their later representations (authority figures).
\par 3.\tab }{\i The offspring of abusive parents}{ \endash  They internalise the abusing, demeaning and
 contemptuous voices and spend their lives in an effort to elicit "counter-voices" from their human environment and thus to extract a modicum of self-esteem and sense of self-worth.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {All three types exhibit recursive, recurrent and Sisyphean failures. Shiel
ded by their defence mechanisms, they constantly gauge reality wrongly, their actions and reactions become more and more rigid and ossified and the damage inflicted by them on themselves and on others ever greater.
\par The narcissistic parent seems to employ a myriad of primitive defences in his dealings with his children. Splitting \endash 
 idealising the child and devaluing him in cycles, which reflect the internal dynamics of the parent rather than anything the child does. Projective Identification \endash  forcing the ch
ild into behaviours and traits, which reflect the parents' fears regarding himself or herself, his or her self-image and his or her self-worth. This is a particularly powerful and pernicious mechanism. If the narcissist parent fears his own deficiencies (
"defects"), vulnerability, perceived weaknesses, susceptibility, gullibility, or emotions \endash 
 he is likely to force the child to "feel" these rejected and (to him) repulsive emotions, to behave in ways strongly abhorred by the parent, to exhibit character tra
its the parent strongly rejects in himself. The child, in a way, becomes the "trash bin" of the parents' inhibitions, fears, self-loathing, self-contempt, perceived lack of self-worth, sense of inadequacy, rejected traits, repressed emotions, failures and
 emotional reticence. Coupled with parent's treatment of the child as the parent's extension, it serves to totally inhibit the psychological growth and emotional maturation of the child. The child becomes a reflection of the parent \endash 
 a vessel through which 
the parent experiences and realises himself for better (hopes, aspirations, ambition, life goals) and for worse (weaknesses, "undesirable" emotions, "negative" traits). A host of other, simpler, defence mechanisms put to use by the parent are likely to ob
s
cure the predominant use of projective identification: projection, displacement, intellectualisation, depersonalisation. Relationships between such parents and their progeny easily deteriorate to sexual or other modes of abuse because there are no functio
ning boundaries between them.
\par It seems that the child's reaction to a narcissistic parent can be either accommodation and assimilation or rejection.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Accommodation and Assimilation
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The child accommodates, idealises and internalises the Primary Object successfully. This means that the child's "internal voice" is narcissistic and that the child tries to comply with its directives and with its explicit and perceived wishes. The child b
e
comes a masterful provider of Narcissistic Supply, a perfect match to the parent's personality, an ideal source, an accommodating, understanding and caring caterer to all the needs, whims, mood swings and cycles of the narcissist, an endurer of devaluatio
n and idealisation with equanimity, a superb adapter to the narcissist's world view, in short: the ultimate extension. This is what we call an "inverted narcissist".
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {We must not neglect the abusive aspect of such a relationship. The narcissistic Primary Obj
ect always alternates between idealisation of his progeny and its devaluation. The child is likely to internalise the devaluing, abusive, demeaning, berating, diminishing, minimising, upbraiding, chastising voices. The parent (or caregiver) goes on to sur
vive inside the adult (as part of a sadistic and ideal Superego and an unrealistic Ego Ideal, to resort to psychoanalytic parlance). These are the voices that inhibit the development of reactive narcissism, the child's defence mechanism.
\par The adult maintains
 these traits. He keeps looking for narcissists in order to feel whole, alive and wanted. He wishes to be treated by a narcissist narcissistically (what others would call abuse is, to him or her, familiar and constitutes Narcissistic Supply). To him, the 
narcissist is a Source of Supply (primary or secondary) and the narcissistic behaviours constitute Narcissistic Supply. He feels dissatisfied, empty and unloved if not loved by a narcissist.
\par The roles of Primary Source of Narcissistic Supply (PSNS) and Secondary Source of Narcissistic Supply (SSNS) are reversed. To the inverted narcissist, a spouse is a Source of PRIMARY Supply, for instance.
\par The other reaction to the narcissistic parent is:
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Rejection
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The child may react to the narcissism of the Primary Obje
ct with a peculiar type of rejection. He develops his own narcissistic personality, replete with grandiosity and lack of empathy \endash 
 BUT his personality is antithetical to the personality of the narcissistic parent. If the parent were a somatic narcissist \endash  he is likely to be a cerebral one, if his father prided himself being virtuous \endash 
 he is sinful, if his mother bragged about her frugality, he is bound to flaunt his wealth.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {An Attempted DSM-Style List of Criteria
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {We came up with a DSM-IV "style" inventory f
or an inverted narcissist, using the narcissists' characteristics as a template, because they are, in many ways two sides of the same coin, or "the mould and the moulded" hence "mirror narcissist" or "inverted narcissist".
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The narcissist tries to merge wit
h an idealised but badly internalised object. He does so by "digesting" the meaningful others in his life and transforming them into extensions of his self. He employs various techniques to achieve this. To the "digested" this is the crux of the harrowing
 experience called "living with a narcissist".
\par The "inverted narcissist" (IN), on the other hand, does not attempt, except in fantasy or in dangerous, masochistic sexual practice, to merge with an idealised external object. This is because he so successfull
y internalised the narcissistic Primary Object to the exclusion of all else. The IN feels ill at ease in a relationship with a non-narcissist because it is unconsciously perceived by him to be "betrayal", "cheating", an abrogation of the exclusivity claus
e he had with the narcissistic Primary Object.
\par This is the big difference between narcissists and their inverted version. The former REJECTED the Primary Object in particular (and object relations in general) in favour of a handy substitute: themselves.
\par The IN accepted the (narcissist) Primary Object and internalised it \endash  to the exclusion of all others (unless they are perceived by him to be faithful renditions, replicas of the narcissistic Primary Object).
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion ONE
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i The IN possesses a rigid sense of lack of self-worth.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
The narcissist has a badly regulated sense of self-worth. However this is not conscious. He goes through cycles of self-devaluation (and experiences them as dysphorias). The IN's sense of self-worth does NOT fluctuate. It is rather stable \endash 
 but it is very low. Whereas the narcissist devalues others \endash 
 the IN devalues himself as an offering, a sacrifice to the narcissist. The IN pre-empts the narcissist by devaluing himself, by actively devaluing his own achievements, or talents. The IN is ex
ceedingly distressed when singled out because of actual achievements or demonstration of superior skills.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The inverted narcissist is compelled to filter all of his narcissistic needs through the primary narcissist in their lives. No independence is permitt
ed. The IN feels amplified by the narcissist's commentary (because nothing can be accomplished by the invert without the approval of a primary narcissist in their lives).
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion TWO
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i Pre-occupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance and
 beauty or of an ideal of love.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
This is the same as the DSM-IV criterion for Narcissistic Personality Disorder but, with the IN, it manifests absolutely differently, i.e. the cognitive dissonance is sharper here because the IN is so absolutely and complete
ly convinced of their worthlessness that these fantasies of grandeur are extremely painful "dissonances".
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {With the narcissist, the dissonance exists on two levels:
\par Between the UNCONSCIOUS feeling of lack of stable self-worth and the grandiose fantasies AND between the grandiose fantasies and reality (the Grandiosity Gap).
\par In comparison, the inverted narcissist can only vacillate between lack of self-worth and reality. No grandiosity is permitted, except in dangerous, forbidden fantasy. This shows that the i
nvert is psychologically incapable of fully realising their inherent potentials without a primary narcissist to filter the praise, adulation or accomplishments through. They MUST have someone to whom praise can be redirected. The dissonance between the IN
's certainty of self-worthlessness and genuine praise that cannot be deflected is likely to emotionally derail the inverted narcissist every time.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion THREE
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
Believes that he is absolutely un-unique and un-special (i.e., worthless and not worthy of mer
ger with the fantasised ideal) and that no one at all could understand him because he is innately unworthy of being understood. The IN becomes very agitated the more one tries to understand him because that also offends against his righteous sense of bein
g properly excluded from the human race.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
A sense of worthlessness is typical of many other PDs (AND the feeling that no one could ever understand them). The narcissist himself endures prolonged periods of self-devaluation, self-deprecation and self-effaceme
nt. This is part of the Narcissistic Cycle. In this sense, the inverted narcissist is a PARTIAL narcissist in that he is permanently fixated in a part of the narcissist wheel, never to experience its complementary half: the narcissistic grandiosity and se
nse of entitlement.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The "righteous sense of being properly excluded" comes from the sadistic Superego in concert with the "overbearing, externally reinforced, conscience".

\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion FOUR
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
Demands anonymity (in the sense of seeking to remain excluded at all costs) and is intensely irritated and uncomfortable with any attention being paid to him \endash  similar to the Schizoid PD.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion FIVE
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i Feels that he is undeserving and not entitled.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Feels that he is inferior to others, lacking, insubstantial, unworthy, unlikeable, unlovable, someone to scorn and dismiss, or to ignore.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion SIX
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
Is extinguishingly selfless, sacrificial, even unctuous in his interpersonal relationships and will avoid the 
assistance of others at all costs. Can only interact with others when he can be seen to be giving, supportive, and expending an unusual effort to assist.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Some narcissists behave the same way but only as a means to obtain Narcissistic Supply (praise, adulat
ion, affirmation, attention). This must not be confused with the behaviour of the IN.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion SEVEN
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
Lacks empathy. Is intensely attuned to others' needs, but only in so far as it relates to his own need to perform the required self-sacrifice, which in turn is necessary in order for the IN to obtain his Narcissistic Supply from the primary narcissist.

\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {By contrast, narcissists are never empathic. They are 
intermittently attuned to others only in order to optimise the extraction of Narcissistic Supply from them.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion EIGHT
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
Envies others. Cannot conceive of being envied and becomes extremely agitated and uncomfortable if even brought into a situation where comparison might occur \endash 
 loathes competition and will avoid competition at all costs, if there is any chance of actually winning the competition, or being singled out.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Criterion NINE
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i Displays extreme shyness, lack of any real relational connections, is 
publicly self-effacing in the extreme, is internally highly moralistic and critical of others; is a perfectionist and engages in lengthy ritualistic behaviours, which can never be perfectly performed (obsessive-compulsive, though not necessarily to the fu
ll extent exhibited in OCD). Notions of being individualistic are anathema.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Reactive Patterns of the Inverted Narcissist (IN)
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The inverted narcissist does not suffer from a "milder" form of narcissism. Like the "classic" narcissists, it has degrees and shades. But it is much more rare and the DSM-IV variety is the more prevalent.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The inverted narcissist is liable to react with rage whenever threatened, or\'85
\par \'85When envious of other people's achievements, their ability to feel wholeness, happiness, rewards a
nd successes, when his sense of self-worthlessness is enhanced by a behaviour, a comment, an event, when his lack of self-worth and voided self-esteem is THREATENED. Thus, this type of narcissist might surprisingly react violently or rage-fully to GOOD th
ings: a kind remark, a mission accomplished, a reward, a compliment, a proposition, a sexual advance).
\par \'85When thinking about the past, when emotions and memories are evoked (usually negative ones) by certain music, a given smell, or sight.
\par \'85When his pathological envy leads to an all-pervasive sense of injustice and being discriminated against or treated unjustly by a spiteful world.
\par \'85When he encounters stupidity, avarice, dishonesty, bigotry \endash  it is these qualities in him that the narcissist really fears and rejects so vehemently in others.
\par \'85When he believes that he failed (and he always entertains this belief), that he is imperfect and useless and worthless, a good for nothing half-baked creature.
\par \'85When he realises to what extent his inner demons possess him, constrain his life, torment him, deform him and the hopelessness of it all.
\par Then even the inverted narcissist rages. He becomes verbally and emotionally abusive. He abuses unfairly confidences. He uncannily pierces the soft spots of his target, and mercil
essly drives home the poisoned dagger of despair and self-loathing until it infects his adversary.
\par The calm after such a storm is even eerier, a thundering silence. The narcissist regrets his behaviour but rarely admit his feelings, though he might apologise profusely.
\par He simply nurtures his feelings as yet another weapon of self-destruction and self-defeat. It is from this very suppressed self-contempt, from this very repressed and introverted judgement, from this missing emotional atonement that the narci
ssistic rage springs forth. Thus the vicious cycle is established.
\par One important difference between inverted narcissists and non-narcissists is that the former are less likely to react with PTSD (Post Traumatic Shock Syndrome) following a relationship with
 a narcissist. They seem to be "desensitised" to narcissists by their early upbringing. Whereas the reactions of normal people to narcissistic behaviour patterns (and especially to the splitting and projective identification defence mechanisms and to the 
idealisation devaluation cycles) is shock, profound hurt and disorientation \endash  inverted narcissists show none of the above.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Life of the Inverted Narcissist (IN)
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The IN is, usually, exceedingly and painfully shy as a child. Despite this social phobia, his
 grandiosity (absorbed from the parent) might direct him to seek "limelight" professions and occupations, which involve exposure, competition, "stage fright" and social friction. The setting can vary from the limited (family) to the expansive (national me
dia) \endash 
 but, whatever it is, the result is constant conflict and feelings of discomfort, even terror and extreme excitement and thrill ("adrenaline rush"). This is because the IN's grandiosity is "imported" and not fully integrated. It is, therefore, not sup
portive of his "grandiose" pursuits (as is the case with the narcissist). On the contrary, the IN feels awkward, pitted on the edge of a precipice, contrived, false and misleading, not to say deceitful.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The inverted narcissist grows up in a suppressive env
ironment. It could be an orthodox, hyper-religious, or traditionalist culture, a monovalent, "black and white", doctrinarian and indoctrinating society \endash 
 or a family which manifests all the above in a microcosm all its own. The inverted narcissist is cast 
in a negative (emergent) role within his family. His "negativity" is attributed to his gender, the order of his birth, religious, social, or cultural dictates and commandments, his "character flaws", his relation to a specific person or event, his acts or
 inaction and so on.
\par In the words of one such IN:
\par "In the religious culture I grew up in. Women are SO suppressed, their roles are so carefully restricted. They are the representation, in the flesh, of all that is sinful, degrading, of all that is wrong with the world.
\par These are the negative gender/cultural images that were force fed to us the negative 'otherness' of women, as defined by men, was fed to me. I was so shy, withdrawn, unable to really relate to people at all from as early as I can remember."
\par The IN is subjected and exposed either to an overbearing, overvalued parent, or to an aloof, detached, emotionally unavailable one \endash  or to both \endash  at an early stage of his life.
\par "I grew up in the shadow of my father who adored me, put me on a pedestal, told m
e I could do or be anything I wanted because I was incredibly bright, BUT, he ate me alive, I was his property and an extension of him. I also grew up with the mounting hatred of my narcissist brother who got none of this attention from our father and got
 
no attention from our mother either. My function was to make my father look wonderful in the eyes of all outsiders, the wonderful parent with a genius Wunderkind as his last child, and the only child of the six that he was physically present to raise from
 the get go. The overvaluation combined with being abjectly ignored or raged at by him when I stepped out of line even the tiniest bit, was enough to warp my personality."
\par The invert cannot, or is prevented from developing full-blown secondary narcissism. T
he invert is so heavily preoccupied in his or her pre-school years in satisfying the narcissistic parent, that the traits of grandiosity and self-love, need for adoration and Narcissistic Supply from ANY viable source remain dormant or repressed.
\par The inver
t simply "knows" that only the narcissistic parent can provide the requisite amount of Narcissistic Supply. The narcissistic parent is so controlling that any attempt to garner praise or adulation from any other source (without the approval of the parent)
 is severely punished by swift devaluation and even the occasional spanking or abuse (physical, emotional, or sexual).
\par This is a vital part of the conditioning that gives rise to inverted narcissism. Where the narcissist exhibits grandiosity, the invert is 
intensely uncomfortable with personal praise, and wishes to always divert praise away from himself onto his narcissist. This is why the IN can only truly FEEL anything when he is in relationship with another narcissist. The IN is conditioned and programme
d from the very beginning to be the perfect companion to the narcissist. To feed their Ego, to be purely their extension, to seek only praise and adulation if it brings greater praise and adulation to the narcissist.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Inverted Narcissist's Survival Guide
\par }\pard\plain \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\bullet \tab 
Listen attentively to everything the narcissist says and agree with it all. Don't believe a word of it but let it slide as if everything is just fine, business as usual.
\par \bullet \tab Offer something absolutely unique to the narcissist which they cannot obtain anywhere else.
\par }\pard \qj \li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {
Also be prepared to line up future Sources of Primary NS for your narcissist because you will not be IT for very long, if at all. If you take over the procuring function for the narcissist, they become that much more dependent on you which makes
 it a bit tougher for them to pull their haughty stuff \endash  an inevitability, in any case.
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\bullet \tab 
Be endlessly patient and go way out of your way to be accommodating, thus keeping the Narcissistic Supply flowing liberally, and keeping the peace (relatively speaking).
\par \bullet \tab Get tremendous personal satisfaction out of endlessly giving. This one may not be attractive to you, but it is a take it or leave it proposition.
\par \bullet \tab Be absolutely emotionally and financially independent of the narcissist. Take what you need: the excit
ement and engulfment (i.e., NS) and refuse to get upset or hurt when the narcissist does or says something dumb. Yelling back works really well but should be reserved for special occasions when you fear your narcissist may be on the verge of leaving you; 
the silent treatment is better as an ordinary response, but it must be devoid of emotional content, more with the air of boredom and "I'll talk to you later, when I am good and ready, and when you are behaving in a more reasonable fashion."
\par \bullet \tab If your narcissist is cerebral and NOT interested in having much sex \endash 
 then give yourself ample permission to have sex with other people. Your cerebral narcissist will not be indifferent to infidelity so discretion and secrecy is of paramount importance.
\par \bullet \tab If your narci
ssist is somatic and you don't mind, join in on endlessly interesting group sex encounters but make sure that you choose properly for your narcissist. They are heedless and very undiscriminating in respect of sexual partners and that can get very problema
tic (STDs and blackmail come to mind).
\par \bullet \tab If you are a "fixer" which most inverted narcissists are, then focus on fixing situations, preferably before they become "situations". Don't for one moment delude yourself that you can FIX the narcissist \endash  it simply 
will not happen. Not because they are being stubborn \endash  they just simply can't be fixed.
\par \bullet \tab If there is any fixing that can be done, it is to help your narcissist become aware of their condition, and this is VERY IMPORTANT, with no negative implications or a
ccusations in the process at all. It is like living with a physically handicapped person and being able to discuss, calmly, unemotionally, what the limitations and benefits of the handicap are and how the two of you can work with these factors, rather tha
n trying to change them.
\par \bullet \tab FINALLY, and most important of all for the inverted narcissist: KNOW YOURSELF.
\par }\pard \qj \li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {What are you getting from the relationship? Are you actually a masochist?
\par Why is this relationship attractive and interesting?
\par Define for yourself what
 good and beneficial things you believe you are receiving in this relationship. Define the things that you find harmful TO YOU. Develop strategies to minimise the harm to yourself. Don't expect that you will cognitively be able to reason with the narcissi
s
t to change who they are. You may have some limited success in getting your narcissist to tone down on the really harmful behaviours THAT AFFECT YOU, which emanate from the unchangeable WHAT the narcissist is. This can only be accomplished in a very trust
ing, frank and open relationship.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
We firmly believe that it is only the inverted narcissist who can have a reasonably good, long lasting relationship with the narcissist. You must be prepared to give your narcissist a LOT of space and leeway.
\par You don't really exist for them as a fully realised person \endash  no one does. They are not fully realised people so they cannot possibly have the skills, no matter how smart or sexy, to be a complete person in the sense that most adults are complete.

\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Somatic versus Cerebral Inverted Narcissists (IN)
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The inverted narcissist is really an erstwhile narcissist internalised by the IN. Inevitably, we are likely to find among the inverted the same propensities, predilections, preferences and inclinations as we do among proper narcissists.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The cerebral IN is an IN whose source of vicarious Primary Narcissistic Supply lies \endash  through the medium and mediation of a narcissist \endash 
 in the exercise of his intellectual faculties. A somatic IN would tend to make use of his body, sex, shape or health in trying to secure NS for "his" narcissist.
\par The inverted narcissist feeds on the primary narcissist and this is his Narcissistic Supply. So these two typologies can, in essence become a self-supporting, symbiotic system. In reality though, both the 
narcissist and the inverted narcissist need to be quite well aware of the dynamics of this relationship in order to make this work as a successful long-term arrangement. It might well be that this symbiosis would only work between a cerebral narcissist an
d a cerebral invert. The somatic narcissist's capricious sexual dalliances would be far too threatening to the equanimity of the cerebral invert for there to be much chance of this succeeding, even for a short time.
\par It would seem that only opposing types of
 narcissists can get along when two classic narcissists are involved in a couple. It follows, syllogistically, that only identical types of narcissist and inverted narcissist can survive in a couple. In other words: the best, most enduring couples of narc
issist and his inverted narcissist mate would involve a somatic narcissist and a somatic IN \endash  or a cerebral narcissist and a cerebral IN.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Coping with Narcissists and Non-Narcissists
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The inverted narcissist is a person who grew up enthralled by the narcissis
tic parent. This parent engulfed and subsumed the child's being to such an over-bearing extent that the child's personality was irrevocably shaped by this engulfment, damaged beyond hope of repair. The child was not even able to develop defence mechanisms
 such as narcissism.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
The end result is an inverted narcissistic personality. The traits of this personality are primarily evident in relationship contexts. The child was conditioned by the narcissistic parent to only be entitled to feel whole, useful, produ
ctive, complete when the child augmented or mirrored to the parent their own sought after narcissistic image. As a result the child is shaped by this engulfment and cannot feel complete in any significant adult relationship unless they are with a narcissi
st.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Inverted Narcissist in Relationship with the Narcissist

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The inverted narcissist is drawn to significant relationships with other narcissists in his adulthood. These relationships are usually spousal primary relationships but can also be friendships with narcissists outside of the primary love relationship.

\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
In a primary relationship, the inverted narcissist attempts to re-create the parent-child relationship. The invert thrives on mirroring to the narcissist his own grandiosity and in so doing the inv
ert obtains his OWN Narcissistic Supply (the dependence of the narcissist upon the invert for their Secondary Narcissistic Supply). The invert must have this form of relationship with a narcissist in order to feel complete and whole. The invert will go as
 
far as he needs to ensure that the narcissist is happy, cared for, properly adored, as he feels is the narcissist's right. The invert glorifies his narcissist, places him on a pedestal, endures any and all narcissistic devaluation with calm equanimity, im
pervious to the overt slights of the narcissist.
\par Narcissistic rage is handled deftly by the inverted narcissist. The invert is exceedingly adept at managing every aspect of his life, tightly controlling all situations, so as to minimise the potential for th
e inevitable narcissistic rages of his narcissist.
\par The invert wishes to be subsumed by the narcissist. The invert only feels truly loved and alive in this kind of relationship. The invert is loth to abandon his relationships with narcissists. The relations
hip only ends when the narcissist withdraws completely from the symbiosis. Once the narcissist has determined that the invert is of no further use, and withholds all Narcissistic Supply from the invert, only then does the invert reluctantly move on to ano
t
her relationship. The invert is most likely to equate sexual intimacy with engulfment. This can be easily misread to mean that the invert is himself or herself a somatic narcissist, but it would be incorrect. The invert can endure years of minimal sexual 
c
ontact with their narcissist and still be able to maintain the self-delusion of intimacy and engulfment. The invert finds a myriad of other ways to "merge" with the narcissist, becoming intimately, though only in support roles, involved with the narcissis
t
's business, career, or any other activity where the invert can feel that they are needed by the narcissist and indispensable. The invert is an expert at doling out Narcissistic Supply and even goes as far as procuring Primary Narcissistic Supply for thei
r
 narcissist (even where this means finding another lover for the narcissist, or participating in group sex with the narcissist). Usually though, the invert seems most attracted to the cerebral narcissist and finds him easier to manage than the somatic nar
c
issist. The cerebral narcissist is disinterested in sex and this makes life considerably easier for the invert, i.e., the invert is less likely to "lose" their cerebral narcissist to another primary partner. A somatic narcissist may be prone to changing p
artners with greater frequency or wish to have no partner, preferring to have multiple, casual sexual relationships of no apparent depth which never last very long.
\par The invert regards relationships with narcissists as the ONLY true and legitimate form of pr
imary relationship. The invert is capable of having primary relationships with non-narcissists. But without engulfment, the invert feels unneeded, unwanted and emotionally uninvolved.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Relationships between the
\par }\pard \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Inverted Narcissist and Non-Narcissists
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The in
verted narcissist can maintain relationships outside of the symbiotic primary relationship with a narcissist. But the invert does not "feel" loved because the non-narcissist is not "engulfing" them. Thus, the invert tends to devalue their non-narcissistic
 primary partner as less than worthy of the inverts' love and attention.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
The invert may be able to sustain a relationship with a non-narcissist by finding other narcissistic symbiotic relationships outside of this primary relationship. The invert may have a
 narcissistic friend, to whom he pays extraordinary attention, ignoring the real needs of the non-narcissistic partner.
\par Consequently, the only semi-stable primary relationship between the invert and the non-narcissist occurs where the non-narcissist is ver
y easy going, emotionally secure and not needing much from the invert at all by way of time, energy or commitment to activities requiring the involvement of both parties. In a relationship with this kind of narcissist, the invert may become a workaholic o
r very involved in outside activities that exclude the non-narcissist spouse.
\par It appears that the inverted narcissist in a relationship with a non-narcissist is behaviourally indistinguishable from a true narcissist. The only important exception is that the invert does not rage at his non-narcissist partner \endash 
 he instead withdraws from the relationship even further. This passive-aggressive reaction has been noted, though, with narcissists as well.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\caps\fs15 
Inverted and Other Atypical / Partial (NOS) Narcissists
\par }{Inverted Narcissists Talk about Themselves
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Competition and (Pathological) Envy
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
"I have a dynamic that comes up with every single person I get close to, where I feel extremely competitive toward and envious of the other person. But I don't ACT competitive, becaus
e at the very outset, I see myself as the loser in the competition. I would never dream of trying to beat the other person, because I know deep in my heart that they would win and I would be utterly humiliated. There are fewer things on earth that feel wo
r
se to me than losing a contest and having the other person gloat over me, especially if they know how much I cared about not losing. This is one thing that I actually feel violent about. I guess I tend to project the grandiosity part of the NPD package on
t
o the other person rather than on a False Ego of my own. So most of the time I'm stuck in a state of deep resentment and envy toward her. To me, she's always far more intelligent, likable, popular, talented, self-confident, emotionally developed, morally 
g
ood, and attractive than I am. And I really hate her for that, and feel humiliated by it. So it's incredibly hard for me to feel happy for this person when she has a success, because I'm overcome with humiliation about myself. This has ruined many a close
 
relationship. I tend to get this way about one person at a time, usually the person who is playing the role of 'my better half', best friends or lovers/partners. So it's not like I'm unable to be happy for anyone, ever, or that I envy every person I meet.
 
I don't get obsessed with how rich or beautiful movie stars are or anything like that. It only gets projected onto this partner-person, the person I'm depending on the most in terms of supplies (attention, reassurance, security, building up my self-esteem
, etc.)...}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i 
...The really destructive thing that happens is, I see her grandiose traits as giving her the power to have anything and anyone she wants. So I feel a basic insecurity, because why should she stay with a loser like me, when she's obviously so out
 of my league? So really, what I'm envious of is the power that all that talent, social ability, beauty, etc., gives her to have CHOICES \endash 
 the choice to stay or leave me. Whereas I am utterly dependent on her. It's this emotional inequality that I find so humiliating."}{
\par }{\i "I agree with the inverted narcissist designation \endash  sometimes I've called myself a 'closet narcissist'. That is, I've internalised the value system of grandiosity, but have not applied the grandiose identity to myself.}{
\par }{\i I believe I SHOULD BE those grandiose things, but at the same time, I know I'm not and I'm miserable about it. So people don't think of me as having an inflated Ego \endash  and indeed I don't \endash 
 but scratch the surface, and you'll find all these inflated expectations. I mean to say that perhaps the parents suppressed every manifestation of grandiosity (very common in early childhood) and of narcissism \endash 
 so that the defence mechanism that narcissism is was 'inverted' and internalised in this unusual form."}{
\par }{\i "Maybe there aren't two discrete states (NPD vs. 'regular' low self-esteem) \endash  maybe it's more of a continuum. And maybe it's just the degree and depth of the problem that distinguishes one from the other.}{
\par }{\i My therapist describes NPD as 'the inability to love oneself'. As she defines it, the 'narcissistic wound' is a deep wounding of the sense of self, the image of oneself. That doesn't mean that other disorders \endash 
 or for that matter, other life stressors \endash  can't also cause low self-esteem. But I think NPD IS low self-esteem...}{
\par }{\i That's what the disorder is really about \endash  an image of yourself that is profoundly negative, and the inability to attain a normal and healthy self-image..."}{
\par }{\i "Yes, I'm a survivor of child abuse. But remember that not all abuse is alike. There are different kinds of abu
se, and different effects. My XXX's style of abuse had to do with trying to annihilate me as a separate person. It also had to do with the need to put all his negative self-image onto me \endash 
 to see in me what he hated in himself. So I got to play the role of the loser that he secretly feared he was. I was flipped back and forth in those roles \endash 
 sometimes I'd be a Source of NS for him, and other times I was the receptacle of all his pain and rage. Sometimes my successes were used to reflect back on him, to sho
w off to the rest of the family. Other times, my successes were threatening to my father, who suddenly feared that I was superior to him and had to be squelched. I experience emotions that most people I know don't feel. Or maybe they do feel them, but to 
f
ar less extreme intensity. For example, the envy and comparison/competition I feel toward others. I guess most of us have experienced rivalry, jealousy, being compared to others. Most of us have felt envy at another's success. Yet most people I know seem 
a
ble to overcome those feelings to some extent, to be able to function normally. In a competition, for example, they may be driven to do their best so they can win. For me, the fear of losing and being humiliated is so intense that I avoid competition comp
l
etely. I am terrified of showing people that I care about doing well, because it's so shaming for me if I lose. So I underachieve and pretend I don't care. Most people I know may envy another person's good luck or success, but it doesn't prevent them from
 
also being happy for them and supporting them. But for me, when I'm in a competitive dynamic with someone, I can't hear about any of their successes, or compliments they've received, etc. I don't even like to see the person doing good things, like bringin
g
 Thanksgiving leftovers to the sick old guy next door, because those things make me feel inferior for not thinking of doing that myself (and not having anyone in my life that I'd do that for). It's just so incredibly painful for me to see evidence of the 
o
ther person's good qualities, because it immediately brings up my feeling of inferiority. I can't even stand to date someone, who looks really good, because I'm jealous of their good looks! So this deep and obsessive envy has destroyed my joy in other peo
ple. All the things about other people that I love and take pleasure in is a double-edged sword because I also hate them for it, for having those good qualities (while, presumably, I don't). I don't know \endash 
 do you think this is garden-variety low self-esteem
? I know plenty of people who suffer from lack of confidence, from timidity, social awkwardness, hatred of their body, feeling unlovable, etc. But they don't have this kind of hostile, corrosive resentment of another person for being all the wonderful thi
n
gs that they can't be, or aren't allowed to be, etc. And one thing I hate is when people are judgemental of me about how I feel, as though I can help it. It's like, 'You shouldn't be so selfish, you should feel happy for her that she's successful', etc. T
h
ey don't understand that I would love to feel those things, but I can't. I can't stop the incredible pain that explodes in me when these feelings get triggered, and I often can't even HIDE the feelings. It's just so overwhelming. I feel so damaged sometim
es. There's more, but that's the crux of it for me, anyway."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Getting Compliments
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
"I love getting compliments and rewards, and do not react negatively to them. In some moods, when my self-hate has gotten triggered, I can sometimes get to places where I'm inc
onsolable, because I get stuck in bitterness and self-pity, and so I doubt the sincerity or the reliability of the good thing that someone is saying to me (to try to cheer me up or whatever). But, if I'm in a reasonable mood and someone offers me somethin
g good, I'm all too happy to accept it! I don't have a stake in staying miserable."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Partiality of the Condition
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
"I do agree that it's (atypical or inverted narcissism) not MILDER. But how I see it is that it's PARTIAL. The part that's there is just as destructive as it is in the typical narcissist. But there are parts missing from that total, full-blown disorder 
\endash  and I see that as healthy, actually. I see it as parts of myself that WEREN'T infected by the pathology, that are still intact.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i In my case, I 
did not develop the overweening Ego part of the disorder. So in a sense, what you have with me is the naked pathology, with no covering: no suaveness, no charm, no charisma, no confidence, no persuasiveness, but also no excuses, no lies, no justifications
 for my feelings. Just the ugly self-hate, for all to see. And the self-hate part is just as bad as it is with a full-blown narcissist, so again, it's not milder.}{
\par }{\i But because I don't have the denial part of the disorder, I have a lot more insight, a lot mor
e motivation to do something about my problems (i.e., I 'self-refer' to therapy), and therefore, I think, a lot more hope of getting better than people whose defence involves totally denying they even have a problem."}{
\par }{\i "When my full-blown XXX's pathological envy would get triggered, he would respond by putting down the person he was envious of \endash 
 or by putting down the accomplishment itself, or whatever good stuff the other person had. He'd trivialise it, or outright contradict it, or find some way to convinc
e the other person (often me) that the thing they're feeling good about isn't real, or isn't worthwhile, or is somehow bad, etc. He could do this because the inflated Ego defence was fully formed and operating with him.}{
\par }{\i When MY pathological envy gets triggered, I will be bluntly honest about it. I'll say something self-pitying, such as: 'You always get the good stuff, and I get nothing'; 'You're so much better than I'; 'People like you better \endash 
 you have good social skills and I'm a jerk'; and so on. Or I mi
ght even get hostile and sarcastic: 'Well, it must be nice to have so many people worshipping you, isn't it?' I don't try to convince myself that the other person's success isn't real or worthwhile, etc. Instead, I'm totally flooded with the pain of feeli
ng utterly inferior and worthless \endash  and there's no way for me to convince myself or anyone else otherwise. I'm not saying that the things I say are pleasant to hear \endash 
 and it is still manipulative of me to say them, because the other person's attention is dr
awn away from their joy and onto my pain and hostility. And instead of doubting their success's worth or reality, they feel guilty about it, or about talking about it, because it hurts me so much. So from the other person's point of view, maybe it's not a
n
y easier to live with a partial narcissist than with a full-blown, in that their joys and successes lead to pain in both cases. It's certainly not easier for me, being flooded with rage and pain instead of being able to hide behind a delusion of grandeur.
 But from my therapist's point of view, I'm much better off because I know I'm unhappy \endash 
 it's in my face all the time. So I'm motivated to work on it and change it. And time has borne her words out. Over the past several years that I've worked on this issue
, I have changed a great deal in how I deal with it. Now when the envy gets triggered, I don't feel so entwined with the other person \endash 
 I recognise that it's my OWN pain getting triggered, not something they are doing to me. And so I can acknowledge the pa
in in a more responsible way, taking ownership of it by saying, 'The jealousy feelings are getting triggered again, and I'm feeling worthless and inferior. Can you reassure me that I'm not?' That's a lot better than making some snide, hostile, or self-pit
ying comment that puts the other person on the defensive or makes them feel guilty... I do prefer the term 'partial' because that's what it feels like to me. It's like a building that's partially built \endash 
 the house of narcissism. For me, the structure is the
re, but not the outside, so you can see inside the skeleton to all the junk that's inside. It's the same junk that's inside a full-blown narcissist, but their building is completed, so you can't see inside. Their building is a fortress, and it's almost im
possible to bring it down. My defences aren't as strong ... which makes my life more difficult in some ways because I REALLY feel my pain. But it also means that the house can be brought down more easily, and the junk inside cleaned out..."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Thinking about the Past and the World
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
"I don't usually get rageful about the past. I feel sort of emotionally cut-off from the past, actually. I remember events very clearly, but usually can't remember the feelings. When I do remember the feelings, my reaction is usually 
one of sadness, and sometimes of relief that I can get back in touch with my past. But not rage. All my rage seems to get displaced on the current people in my life."}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i "...When I see someone being really socially awkward and geeky, passive-aggressive, indir
ect and victim-like, it does trigger anger in me because I identify with that person and I don't want to. I try to put my negative feelings onto them, to see that person as the jerk, not me \endash 
 that's what a narcissist does, after all. But for me it doesn't completely work because I know, consciously, what I'm trying to do. And ultimately, I'm not kidding anyone, least of all myself."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Self-Pity and Depression
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i "More self-pity and depression here \endash 
 not so much rage. One of the things that triggers my rage more 
than anything else is the inability to control another person, the inability to dominate them and force my reality on them. I feel impotent, humiliated, forced back on my empty self. Part of what I'm feeling here is envy: that person who can't be controll
ed clearly has a self and I don't, and I just hate them for it. But it's also a power struggle \endash  I want to get Narcissistic Supply by being in control and on top and having the other person submissive and compliant..."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Regretting, Admitting Mistakes
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i "I regr
et my behaviour horribly, and I DO admit my feelings. I am also able, in the aftermath, to have empathy for the feelings of the person I've hurt, and I'm horribly sad about it, and ashamed of myself. It's as though I'd been possessed by a demon, acted out
 
all this abusive horrible stuff, and then, after the departure of the demon, I'm back in my right mind and it's like, 'What have I DONE???' I don't mean I'm not responsible for what I did (i.e., a demon made me do it). But when I'm triggered, I have no em
pathy \endash  I can only see my projection onto that person, as a huge threat to me, someone who must be demolished. But when my head clears, I see that person's pain, hurt, fear \endash 
 and I feel terrible. I want to make it up to them. And that feeling is totally sincere \endash  it's not an act. I'm genuinely sorry for the pain I've caused the other person."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Rage
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i "I wouldn't say that my rage comes from repressed self-contempt (mine is not repressed 
\endash  I'm totally aware of it). And it's not missing atonement either, since I d
o atone. The rage comes from feeling humiliated, from feeling that the other person has somehow sadistically and gleefully made me feel inferior, that they're getting off on being superior, that they're mocking me and ridiculing me, that they have scorn a
nd contempt for me and find it all very amusing. That \endash  whether real or imagined (usually imagined) \endash  is what causes my rage."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Pursuing Relationships with Narcissists
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i "There are some very few of us who actually seek out relationships with narcissists. We do
 this with the full knowledge that we are not wanted, despised even. We persist and pursue no matter the consequences, no matter the cost. I am an 'inverted narcissist'. It is because as a child I was 'imprinted/fixated' with a particular pattern involvin
g
 relationships. I was engulfed so completely by my father's personality and repressed so severely by various other factors in my childhood that I simply didn't develop a recognisable personality. I existed purely as an extension of my father. I was his ge
n
ius Wunderkind. He ignored my mother and poured all his energy and effort into me. I did not develop full-blown secondary narcissism... I developed into the perfect 'other half' of the narcissists moulding me. I became the perfect, eager co-dependent. And
 this is an imprint, a pattern in my psyche, a way of (not) relating to the world of relationships by only being able to truly relate to one person (my father) and then one kind of person \endash 
 the narcissist. He is my perfect lover, my perfect mate, a fit that is so slick and smooth, so comfortable and effortless, so filled with meaning and actual feelings \endash 
 that's the other thing. I cannot feel on my own. I am incomplete. I can only feel when I am engulfed by another (first it was my father) and now \endash  well now
 it has to be a narcissist. Not just any narcissist either. He must be exceedingly smart, good looking, have adequate reproductive equipment and some knowledge on how to use it and that's about it. When I am engulfed by someone like this I feel completed,
 
I can actually FEEL. I am whole again. I function as a sibyl, an oracle, an extension of the narcissist. His fiercest protector, his purveyor/procurer of NS, the secretary, organiser, manager, etc. I think you get the picture and this gives me INTENSE PLE
ASURE.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i 
So the answer to your question: 'Why would anyone want to be with someone who doesn't want them back?' The short answer is, 'Because there is no one else remotely worth looking at.'"}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Making Amends
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i "I mostly apologise, and I give the person space to t
alk about what hurt them so that (1) they get to express their anger or hurt to me, and (2) I can understand better and know better how not to hurt them (if I can avoid it) the next time there's a conflict. Sometimes the hurt I cause is unintentional 
\endash  may
be I've been insensitive or forgetful or something, in which case I feel more certain that I can avoid repeating the hurtful behaviour, since I didn't want to hurt them in the first place. If the hurt I caused has to do with my getting my trigger pulled a
n
d going into a rage, then that hurt was quite deliberate, although at the time I was unable to experience the other person as vulnerable or capable of being hurt by me. And I do realise that if that trigger is pulled again, it might happen again. But I al
s
o hope that there'll be a LITTLE TINY window where the memory of the conversation will come back to me while I'm in my rage, and I'll remember that the person really IS vulnerable. I hope that by hearing over and over that the person actually does feel hu
rt by what I say while in rages, that I might remember that when I am triggered and raging. So, mostly I apologise and try to communicate with the other person. I don't verbally self-flagellate, because that's manipulative. Not to say I never do that 
\endash  in fact I've had a dynamic with people where I verbally put myself down and try to engage the other person into arguing me out of it.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i But if I'm in the middle of apologising to the other person for hurting them, then I feel like this is their moment, and I don
't want to turn the focus toward getting them to try to make me feel better. I will talk about myself, but only in an attempt to communicate, so that we can understand each other better. I might say, 'I got triggered about such-and-such, and you seemed so
 invulnerable that it enraged me', etc. \endash  and the other person might react with, 'But I was feeling vulnerable, I just couldn't show it', etc. \endash 
 and we'll go back and forth like that. So it's not like I don't think my feelings count, and I do want the other
 person to UNDERSTAND my feelings, but I don't want to put the other person in the role of taking care of my feelings in that moment, because they have just been hurt by me and I'm trying to make it up to them, not squeeze more stuff OUT of them..."}{

\par }{\i "So when I've been a real jerk to someone, I want them to feel like it's OK to be pissed off at me, and I want them to know that I am interested in and focused on how they feel, not just on how I feel. As for gifts \endash 
 I used to do that, but eventually I came to f
eel that that was manipulative, too, that it muddled things because then the other person would feel like they couldn't be angry anymore, since after all, I've just brought them this nice gift. I also feel that in general, gift-giving is a sweet and tende
r thing to do, and I don't want to sully that tenderness by associating it with the hurt that comes from abusive behaviour."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Why Narcissists?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
"I am BUILT this way. I may have overstated it by saying that I have 'no choice' because, in fact I do.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i The choice is \endash 
 live in an emotionally deadened monochrome world where I can reasonably interact with normal people OR I can choose to be with a narcissist in which case my world is Technicolor, emotionally satisfying, alive and wondrous (also can be turbulent and a 
real roller coaster ride for the unprepared, not to mention incredibly damaging for people who are not inverted narcissists and who fall into relationships with narcissists). As I have walked on both sides of the street, and because I have developed copin
g mechanisms that protect me really quite well, I can reasonably safely engage in a primary, intimate relationship with a narcissist without getting hurt by it.}{
\par }{\i The real WHY of it all is that I learned, as a young child, that being 'eaten alive' by a narcissist parent, to the point where your existence is but an extension of his own, was how all relationships ought to work. It is a psychological imprint 
\endash  my 'love map', it is what feels right to me intrinsically. A pattern of living \endash  I don't know how else t
o describe it so you and others will understand how very natural and normal this is for me. It is not the torturous existence that most of the survivors of narcissism are recounting on this list.}{
\par }{\i My experiences with narcissists, to me, ARE NORMAL for me. C
omfortable like an old pair of slippers that fit perfectly. I don't expect many people to attempt to do this, to 'make themselves into' this kind of person. I don't think anyone could, if they tried.}{
\par }{\i It is my need to be engulfed and merged that drives me t
o these relationships and when I get those needs met I feel more normal, better about myself. I am the outer extension of the narcissist. In many ways I am a vanguard, a public two-way warning system, fiercely defending my narcissist from harm, and fierce
l
y loyal to him, catering to his every need in order to protect his fragile existence. These are the dynamics of my particular version of engulfment. I don't need anyone to take care of me. I need only to be needed in this very particular way, by a narciss
ist who inevitably possesses the ability to engulf in a way that normal, fully realised adults cannot. It is somewhat paradoxical \endash 
 I feel freer and more independent with a narcissist than without one. I achieve more in my life when I am in this form of relationship. I try harder, work harder, am more creative, think better of myself, excel in most every aspect of my life."}{
\par }{\i "...I go ahead and cater to him and pretend that his words don't hurt, and later, I engage in an internal fight with myself for being so
 damned submissive. It's a constant battle and I can't seem to decide which voice in my head I should listen to... I feel like a fool, yet, I would rather be a fool with him than a lonely, well-rounded woman without him. I've often said that the only way 
that we can stay together is because we feed off of each other. I give him everything he needs and he takes it. Seeing him happy and pleased is what gives me pleasure. I feel very successful then."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Partial NPD
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i "I do think it's uncommon for girls to develop 
these patterns, as they are usually trained to be self-effacing. I certainly was! However, I have a lot of the very same underlying patterns that full-blown, obnoxiously egotistical NP's have, but I am not egotistical because I didn't develop the pattern 
o
f inflated Ego and grandiosity. All the rest of it is there, though: fragile Ego, lack of a centre or self, super-sensitive to criticism and rejections, pathological, obsessive envy, comparisons and competitive attitudes toward others, a belief that every
one in the world is either superior or inferior to me, and so on.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i 
Sometimes I kind of wish I had developed the inflated Ego of a complete NP, because then I would at least be able to hide from all the pain I feel. But at the same time, I'm glad I didn't, because those people have a much lower chance of recovery \endash 
 how can they recover if they don't acknowledge anything is wrong? Whereas it's pretty clear to me I have problems, and I've spent my life working on them and trying to change myself and heal."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissist-Non Narcissist
\par }\pard \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {And Narcissist-Inverted Narcissist Couples
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i 
"Can a N and a non-N ever maintain a long lasting marriage? It would seem that a non-N would have too much self-esteem to lend himself to a lifetime of catering and pandering to an N's unendin
g need for unearned adoration and glory. I, as a non-N... got tired of these people and their unremitting attempts to drain my psyche within a relatively short period of time and abandoned them as soon as I realised what I was dealing with to preserve my 
own sanity."}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i 
"It depends on the non-narcissist, really. Narcissism is a RIGID, systemic pattern of responses. It is so all-pervasive and all-encompassing that it is a PERSONALITY disorder. If the non-narcissist is codependent, for instance, then the narciss
ist is a perfect match for him and the union will last..."}{
\par }{\i "You have to pimp for the narcissist, intellectually, and sexually. If your narcissist is somatic, you are much better off lining up the sex partners than leaving it to him. Intellectual pimping is
 more varied. You can think of wonderful things and then subtly string out the idea, in the most delicate of packages and watch the narcissist cogitate their way to 'their' brilliant discovery whilst you bask in the glow of their perfection and success...
 The point of this entire exercise is to assure YOUR supply, which is the narcissist himself, not to punish yourself by giving away a great idea or abase yourself because, of course, YOU are not worthy of having such a great idea on your own \endash 
 but who knows, it may seem that way to the inverted narcissist. It really depends on how self-aware the inverted is."}{
\par }{\i "The only rejection you need to fear is the possibility of losing the narcissist and if one is doing everything else right, this is very unlikely to ha
ppen! So by 'emotionally independent' I am talking about being self-assured, doing your own thing, having a life, feeling strong and good about yourself, getting emotional sustenance from other people. I mean, let's face it, a drug is a drug is a habit. H
abits just are, and what they ARE NOT are the be all and end all of love, commitment and serene symmetrical, balanced emotional perfection that is the ideal of the romanticised 'love-for-a-lifetime' all-American relationship dream."}{
\par }{\i "(I am) terribly turned 
on by narcissists. The most exciting moments of my life in every venue have been with narcissists. It is as if living and loving with normal people is a grey thing by comparison, not fuelled by sufficient adrenaline. I feel like a junkie, now, that I no l
o
nger permit myself the giddy pleasure of the RUSH I used to know when I was deeply and hopelessly involved with an N. I am like a lotus-eater. And I always felt guilty about this and also sorry that I ever succumbed that first time to my first narcissist 
lover."}{
\par }{\i "I am exactly this way and I feel exactly as you do, that the world is a sepia motion picture but when I am intimately involved with a narcissist, it breaks out into three-dimensional Technicolor and I can see and feel in ways that are not available
 to me otherwise. In my case I developed this (inverted narcissism) as a result of being the favourite of my father who so completely absorbed me into his personality that I was not able to develop a sense of separation. So I am stuck in this personality 
matrix of needing to be engulfed, adored by and completely taken over by a narcissist in my life. In turn, I worship, defend, regulate and procure Narcissistic Supply for my narcissist. It is like the mould and the moulded."}{
\par }{\i "In my case, I realise that whil
e I can't stop loving my current narcissist, it isn't necessary for me to avoid as long as I can understand. In my way of looking at it, he is deserving of love, and since I can give him love without it hurting me, then as long as he needs it, he shall ha
ve it."}{
\par }{\i "My personal theory is that dogmatic religious culture is a retarding influence on the growth and maturation of those heavily involved \endash 
 more and more autonomy (and hence personal responsibility) seems to be blithely sacrificed to the group mind/spi
rit. It is as though the church members become one personality and that personality is narcissistic and the individual just folds under the weight of that kind of group pressure \endash  particularly if you are a child."}{
\par }{\i "If I displayed behaviour that made my XXX
 look good to others, I was insipidly overvalued. When I dared be something other than who she wanted me to be, the sarcastic criticism and total devaluation was unbelievable. So, I learned to be all things to all people. I get a heavenly high from surren
dering my power to a narcissist, to catering to them, in having them overvalue and need me, and it is the only time that I truly feel alive..."}{
\par }{\i "We have very little choice in all of this. We are as vacant and warped as the narcissist. XXX is wont to say, 'I
 don't HAVE a personality disorder, I AM a personality disorder.' It defines who we are and how we will respond. You will always and ONLY have real feelings when you are with a narcissist. It is your love map, it is the programming within your psyche. Doe
s
 it need to control your behaviour? Not necessarily. Knowing what you are can at least give you the opportunity to forecast the effect of an action before you take it. So, loveless black and white may be the very healthiest thing for you for the foreseeab
le future. I tend to think of these episodes with narcissists as being cyclic. You will likely need to cut loose for a while when your child is older.}{
\par }{\i DO NOT feel ashamed please! Should a physically handicapped person feel ashamed of their handicap? No and 
neither should we. The trouble with us is that we are fooled into thinking that these relationships are 'guilty pleasures'. They feel so very good for a time but they are more akin to addiction satisfaction rather than being the 'right match' or an 'appro
p
riate relationship'. I am still very conflicted myself about this. I wrote a few months ago that it was like having a caged very dangerous animal inside of me. When I get near narcissists, the animal smells its own kind and it wants out. I very carefully 
'micro-manage' my life. This means that I daily do fairly regular reality checks and keep a very tight reign on my self and my behaviours. I am also obsessive-compulsive."}{
\par }{\i "I feel as though I'm constantly on an emotional roller coaster. I may wake up in a g
ood mood, but if my N partner does or says something, which is hurtful to me, my mood changes immediately. I now feel sad, empty, afraid. All I want to do at this point is anything that will make him say something NICE to me.}{
\par }{\i Once he does, I'm back on top 
of the world. This pattern of mood changes, or whatever you may call them, can take place several times a day. Each and every day. I've gotten to the point where I'm not sure that I can trust myself to feel any one way, because I know that I have no contr
ol over myself. He has the control. It's scary, yet I've sort of come to depend on him determining how I am going to feel."}{
\par }{\i "When I was first involved with my cerebral narcissist I was like this but after awhile I just learned to become more emotionally dis
tant (the ups and downs were just too much) and find emotional gratification with other people, mostly girl friends and one of two male friends. I make a point of saying... that the invert must be or become emotionally and financially independent (if you 
d
on't do this he will eat you up and when he has finished with you and you are nothing but a husk, you will be expelled from his life in one big vomit). It is really important for you to start to take responsibility for your own emotional wellness without 
regard to how he treats you. Remember that the narcissist has the emotional maturity of a two-year old! Don't expect much in the way of emotional depth or support in your relationship \endash  he simply is not capable of anything that sophisticated."}{

\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par }\pard \qr \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 (*) Alice R
atzlaff, graduate of Queen's University School of Law, Kingston, Ontario, Canada practices child protection defence law in British Columbia, Canada. Ms. Ratzlaff was a professional 'cellist before entering law school. Ms. Ratzlaff has two sons.}{
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 42
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Narcissism with Other
\par Mental Health Disorders
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Co-Morbidity and Dual Diagnosis}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Question:}{\cgrid0  Does narcissism often occur with other mental health disorders (co-morbidity) or with substance abuse (dual diagnosis)?}{

\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Answer:}{\cgrid0  }{NPD 
(Narcissistic Personality Disorder) is often diagnosed with other mental health disorders (such as the Borderline, Histrionic or Antisocial Personality Disorder). This is called "co-morbidity". It is also often accompanied by substance abuse and other rec
kless and impulsive behaviours and this is called "dual diagnosis".
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
But there is one curious match, one logic-defying co-appearance of mental health disorders: narcissism and the Schizoid Personality Disorder [see FAQ 38].
\par The basic dynamic of this particular brand of co-morbidity goes like this:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-227\li397\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin397\itap0 {
1. The narcissist feels superior, unique, entitled and better than his fellow men. He thus tends to despise them, to hold them in contempt and to regard them as lowly and subservient beings.
\par 2. The narcissist feels 
that his time is invaluable, his mission of cosmic importance, his contributions to humanity priceless. He, therefore, demands total obedience and catering to his ever-changing needs. Any demands on his time and resources is deemed to be both humiliating 
and wasteful.
\par 3. But the narcissist is DEPENDENT on input from other people for the performance of certain Ego functions (such as the regulation of his sense of self-worth). Without Narcissistic Supply (adulation, adoration, attention), the narcissist shriv
els and withers and is dysphoric (=depressed).
\par 4. The narcissist resents this dependence (described in point 3). He is furious at himself for his neediness and \endash  in a typical narcissistic manoeuvre (called "alloplastic defence") \endash  he blames OTHERS for his 
anger. He displaces his rage and its roots.
\par 5. Many narcissists are paranoids. This means that they are afraid of people and of what people might do to them. Think about it: wouldn't you be scared and paranoid if your very life depended continually on the 
goodwill of others? The narcissist's very life depends on others providing him with Narcissistic Supply. He becomes suicidal if they stop doing so.
\par 6. To counter this overwhelming feeling of helplessness (=dependence on Narcissistic Supply), the narcissist
 becomes a control freak. He sadistically manipulates others to satisfy his needs. He derives pleasure from the utter subjugation of his human environment.
\par 7. Finally, the narcissist is a latent masochist. He seeks punishment, castigation and ex-communication. This self-destruction is the only way to validate powerful voices he internalised as a child ("You are a bad, rotten, hopeless child").
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {As you can easily see, the narcissistic landscape is fraught with contradictions. The narcissist depends on people \endash 
 but hates and despises them. He wants to control them unconditionally \endash  but is also looking to punish himself savagely. He is terrified of persecution ("persecutory delusions") \endash 
 but seeks the company of his own "persecutors" compulsively. The narcissist
 is the victim of incompatible inner dynamics, ruled by numerous vicious circles, pushed and pulled simultaneously by irresistible forces. A minority of narcissists choose the SCHIZOID SOLUTION. They choose, in effect, to disengage, both emotionally and s
ocially [see FAQ 38].
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 HPD (Histrionic Personality Disorder) and Somatic NPD}{

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 I "invented" another \endash  twilight zone \endash 
 category between NPD and HPD, which I call "somatic narcissists". These are narcissists who acquire their Narcissistic Supply by making use of their bodies, of sex, of physical of physiological achievements, traits, health, exercise, or relationships.

\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Here is how the DSM-IV defines HPD:}{
\par }{\cgrid0 A pervasive pattern of excessive emotionality and attention seeking, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five or more of the following:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Is uncomfortable in situations in which he or she is not the centre of attention;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Interaction with others is often characterised by INAPPROPRIATE SEXUALLY SEDUCTIVE or provocative behaviour (very rare with a narcissist \endash  SV);}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Displays rapidly shifting and shallow expression of emotions;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Consistently uses physical appearance to draw attention to self;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Has a style of speech that is excessively impressionistic and lacking in detail;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Shows self-dramatisation, theatricality, and exaggerated expression of emotion;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Is suggestible, i.e. easily influenced by others or circumstances;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Considers relationships to be more intimate than they actually are.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Narcissists and Depression}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 I
f by "depression" we also mean "numbness" then narcissists are often depressed. Most narcissists are simply numb, emotionally absent, non-existent. Their emotions are not accessible, not "available" to them. So, they inhabit a grey emotional twilight zone
.
 The world looks false, fake, invented, contrived, in wrong hues. But they do not have a sense of living in prison. Once in prison, the inmate remembers there's an outside world and a way out. Not so in narcissism. The outside has long faded into oblivion
. And there's no way out.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 DID and NPD}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
Is the False Self an alter? In other words: is the True Self of a narcissist the equivalent of a host personality in a DID (Dissociative Identity Disorder) \endash  and the False Self }{\endash }{\cgrid0  one of the fragmented personalities, als
o known as "alters"?}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 
My personal opinion is that the False Self is a construct, not a self in the full sense. It is the locus of the fantasies of grandiosity, the feelings of entitlements, omnipotence, magical thinking, omniscience and magical immunity of 
the narcissist. It lacks so many other elements that it can hardly be called a "self". Moreover, it has no "cut-off" date. DID alters have a date of inception, as a reaction to trauma or abuse (they have an "age"). The False Self is a process, not an enti
t
y, it is a reactive pattern and a reactive formation. All taken into account, the choice of words by various theoreticians was poor. The False Self is not a self, nor is it false. It is very real, more real to the narcissist than his True Self. A better c
hoice would have been "abuse reactive self" or something to that effect.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 I say that narcissists vanish and are replaced by a False Self [Kernberg]. There is NO True Self in there. It's gone. The narcissist is a hall of mirrors \endash  but the hall itself is an op
tical illusion created by the mirrors... This is a little like the paintings of Escher.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 MPD (DID) is more common than believed. Those are the emotions that are segregated. The notion of "unique separate multiple whole personalities" is primitive and untrue
. DID is a continuum. The inner language breaks down into polyglottal chaos. Emotions cannot communicate with each other for fear of pain (and its fatal results). So, they are being kept apart by various mechanisms (a host or birth personality, a facilita
tor, a moderator and so on).}{
\par }{\cgrid0 All PDs \endash  except NPD \endash  suffer from a modicum of dissociation. The narcissistic solution is to emotionally disappear. Hence, the tremendous, insatiable need of the narcissist for external approval. He exists ONLY as a reflection.
 Since he is forbidden to love his self \endash  he chooses to have no self at all. It is not dissociation \endash  it is a vanishing act.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 This is why I regard pathological narcissism as THE Source of all PDs. The total, "pure" solution is NPD: self-extinguishing, self-
abolishing, totally fake. Then come variations on the self-hate and perpetuated self-abuse themes: HPD (NPD with sex/body as the Source of the Narcissistic Supply), BPD (lability, movement between poles of life wish and death wish) and so on.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Why are narcissists not prone to suicide? Simple: they died a long time ago. They are the true zombies of the world. Read vampire and zombie legends and you will see how narcissistic these creatures are.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 NPD and ADHD}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 NPD has been associated lately with Attention Defici
t / Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD or ADD) and with RAD (attachment disorder). The rationale is that children suffering from ADHD are unlikely to develop the attachment necessary to prevent a narcissistic regression [Freud] or adaptation [Jung]. Bonding and
 
object relations ought to be affected by ADHD. Research, which supports this has yet to be made available. Still, many psychotherapists and psychiatrists use it as a working hypothesis. Another proposed linkage is between autistic disorders (such as Asper
ger's Syndrome) and narcissism.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 BPD, NPD and other Cluster B PDs}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
All PDs are interrelated, in my view, at least phenomenologically. True, there is no "grand unifying theory of psychopathology". No one knows whether there are \endash  and what are \endash  the mechanisms 
underlying mental disorders. At best, mental health professionals register symptoms (as reported by the patient) and signs (as observed). Then, they group them into syndromes and, more specifically, into disorders. This is descriptive, not explanatory sci
ence. Sure, there are a few theories around (psychoanalysis, to mention the most famous) but they all failed miserably at providing a coherent, consistent theoretical framework with predictive powers and falsifiable predictions.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Still, observations are a powerful tool, if properly used. People who suffer from personality disorders have many things in common:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\bullet \tab 
Most of them are insistent (except those suffering from the Schizoid or the Avoidant Personality Disorders). They demand treatment on a preferential a
nd privileged basis. They complain about numerous symptoms. They never obey the physician or his treatment recommendations and instructions.
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab They regard themselves as unique, display a streak of grandiosity and a diminished capacity for empathy (the abil
ity to appreciate and respect the needs and wishes of other people). They regard the physician as inferior to them, alienate him using umpteen techniques and bore him with their never-ending self-preoccupation.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab They are manipulative and exploitative because they trust no one and usually cannot love or share. They are socially maladaptive and emotionally unstable.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Most personality disorders start out as problems in personal development which peak during adolescence and then become personality disorders. 
They stay on as enduring qualities of the individual. Personality disorders are stable and all-pervasive \endash 
 not episodic. They affect most of the areas of functioning of the patient: his career, his interpersonal relationships, his social functioning.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab The
 person suffering a PD is not happy. He is depressed, suffers from auxiliary mood, affective and anxiety disorders. He does not like himself, his character, his (deficient) functioning, or his (crippling) influence on others. But his defences are so stron
g, that he is, usually, dimly aware only of the distress \endash  and not of its reasons to it.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab The patient with a personality disorder is vulnerable to and prone to suffer from a host of other psychiatric disturbances. It is as though his psychological immunolo
gical system has been disabled by the personality disorder and he falls prey to other variants of mental sickness. So much energy is consumed by the disorder and by its corollaries (example: by obsessions-compulsions), that the patient is rendered defence
less.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab 
Patients with personality disorders are alloplastic in their defences. In other words: they would tend to blame the external world for their mishaps. In stressful situations, they try to pre-empt a (real or imaginary) threat, change the rules of the
 game, introduce new variables, or otherwise influence the external world to conform to their needs. This is as opposed to autoplastic defences exhibited, for instance, by neurotics (who change their internal psychological processes in stressful situation
s).}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab 
The character problems, behavioural deficits and emotional deficiencies and instability encountered by the patient with a personality disorder are, mostly, ego-syntonic. This means that the patient does not find his personality traits or behaviour obj
ectionable, unacceptable, disagreeable, or alien to his self. As opposed to that, neurotics are ego-dystonic: they do not like what they are and how they behave.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab The personality-disordered are not psychotic. They have no hallucinations, delusions or thou
ght disorders (except those who suffer from the Borderline Personality Disorder and who experience brief psychotic "microepisodes", mostly during treatment).}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 They are also fully oriented, with clear senses (sensorium), good memory and general fund of knowl
edge and are, in all-important respects, "normal".}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The Diagnostics and Statistics Manual [}{American Psychiatric Association. DSM-IV. 4th Ed. Washington}{\cgrid0 , 1994] defines "personality" as:
\par }{\i\cgrid0 "...enduring patterns of perceiving, relating to, and thinking about the environment and oneself... exhibited in a wide range of important social and personal contexts."}{\i 
\par }{\cgrid0 It defines personality disorders as:}{
\par }{\b\cgrid0 A.}{\cgrid0  An enduring pattern of inner experience and behaviour that deviates markedly from the expectations of the individual's culture. This pattern is manifested in two (or more) of the following areas:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-227\li397\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin397\itap0 {a.\tab Cognition (i.e., ways of perceiving and interpreting self, other people, and events);
\par }{\cgrid0 b.\tab Affectivity (i.e., the range, intensity, lability, and appropriateness of emotional response);}{
\par }{\cgrid0 c.\tab Interpersonal functioning;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 d.\tab Impulse control.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\cgrid0 B.}{\cgrid0  The enduring pattern is inflexible and pervasive across a broad range of personal and social situations.}{
\par }{\b\cgrid0 C.}{\cgrid0  The enduring pattern leads to clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning.}{
\par }{\b\cgrid0 D.}{\cgrid0  The pattern is stable and of long duration, and its onset can be traced back at least to adolescence or early adulthood.}{
\par }{\b\cgrid0 E.}{\cgrid0  The enduring pattern is not better accounted for as a manifestation or consequence of another mental disorder.}{
\par }{\b\cgrid0 F. }{\cgrid0 The enduring pattern is not due to the direct physiological effects of a substance (e.g., a drug abuse, a medication) or a general medical condition (e.g., head trauma).}{
\par }{\fs16\cgrid0 [}{\fs16 American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV. 4th ed. Washington, 1994}{\fs16\cgrid0 ]
\par }{\cgrid0 I think that each PD has its own form of Narcissistic Supply:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet \tab }{\i\cgrid0 HPD}{\cgrid0  (Histrionic PD) \endash  Sex, seduction, flirtation, romance, body;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab }{\i\cgrid0 NPD}{\cgrid0  (Narcissistic PD) \endash  Adulation, admiration;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab }{\i\cgrid0 BPD}{\cgrid0  (Borderline PD) \endash  Presence (they are terrified of abandonment);}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab }{\i\cgrid0 AsPD}{\cgrid0  (Antisocial PD) \endash  Money, power, control, fun.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 To my mind, B
PDs, for instance, are NPDs who are scared of being abandoned. They know that if they hurt people, the latter might abandon them. So, they are very careful. They DO care deeply about not hurting others \endash 
 but this is a selfish motivation: they don't want to lose those others, they are dependent on them. If you are a drug addict, you are not likely to pick up a fight with your pusher. BPDs also have deficient impulse control, as do AsPDs.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Each PD has its own "story", a "narrative". The way to healing is replete with the ostracons of these narratives. To heal, a PD MUST break through his or her narrative and OUT into the world and to assume personal responsibility.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 All PDs engage in scapegoating and bag-punching. Their parents, abusers, the world, God, or histo
ry are responsible for what they are and what we do DECADES after the original abuse. Research shows that the brain is more plastic than many thought it to be. One can CHOOSE to heal. If one doesn't \endash  it is because there is gain in infirmity.}{

\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 NPDs and Other PDs}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 A few points to ponder:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet \tab 
NPDs are afraid of abandonment and do everything they can to bring it about (and thus "control" it). BPDs are terrified of abandonment and they do everything they can either to avoid relationships in the first place \endash  or to 
prevent abandonment (cling or emotionally extort) once in a relationship.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Seductive behaviour alone is NOT necessarily indicative of HPD. Somatic narcissists behave this way as well.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab I think that the diagnostic distinctions between the Cluster B disord
ers are pretty artificial. It is true that some traits are much more pronounced (or even qualitatively different) in given disorders. For example: the grandiose fantasies typical to a narcissist (their pervasiveness, their influence on the minutest behavi
our, their tendency to inflate and so on) \endash  are rather unique in both severity and character to NPD.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab But I think that they all the Cluster B Personality Disorders occupy a continuum.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab 
It used to be thought that NPDs are ego-syntonic ALL the time. That they do not have reactive psychoses and do not suffer from psychotic microepisodes under stress. Recent research has disproved these "differential diagnoses criteria". NPDs are a lot like
 BPDs in so many respects that the likes of Kernberg suggested abolishing the distinction altogether. All Cluster B PDs seem to arise from pathological narcissism.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab NPD rarely comes in its "pure" form. It is almost always co-morbid with other disorders (OCD, BPD, HPD, AsPD).}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 NPD and Neuroses}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
The differences between PDs and neuroses is that PDs have ALLOPLASTIC defences (react to stress by attempting to change the external environment or by shifting the blame to it) while neurotics have AUTOPLASTIC defences 
(react to stress by attempting to change their internal processes, or assuming blame). The second important difference is that PDs TEND to be ego-syntonic (perceived by the patient to be acceptable, unobjectionable and part of the self) while neurotics te
nd to be ego-dystonic (the opposite).}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 This is exactly why PD Clusters were invented in 1987. I, personally, as I said, feel that there is a continuum BPD-HPD-NPD-AsPD.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 A sense of entitlement, for instance, is common to ALL Cluster B disorders. Narcissists almost never act on their suicidal ideation \endash  BPDs do so incessantly (cutting \endash  self injury \endash 
 or mutilation). But both tend to become suicidal in crisis.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 NPDs can suffer from brief reactive psychoses exactly as BPDs suffer from psychotic microepisodes. Actu
ally, there is a whole sub-field in psychodynamic theories of narcissism, which tries to explain the dynamics of reactive psychoses in pathological narcissism.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 There are some differences between NPD and BPD, though:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-227\li397\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin397\itap0 {\cgrid0 a.\tab The narcissist is much less impulsive;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 b.\tab The narcissist is less self-destructive, rarely self-mutilates, and practically never attempts suicide;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 c.\tab The narcissist is more stable (reduced emotional lability, stability in interpersonal relationships and so on).}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Psychopaths or sociopaths are th
e old names for Antisocial PD. They are no longer in use, generally. But, the line between NPD and AsPD is very thin. I, personally, believe (especially after my work in prison) that AsPD is simply a less inhibited form of NPD and that applying the two di
agnoses to the same person is superfluous.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The differential diagnoses are nowhere near where they should be ideally but are developing by the day. At this stage, diagnosticians are in the habit of diagnosing multiple PDs ("co-morbidity"). It is extremely ra
re to diagnose a single pure PD. Some textbooks at home which URGE diagnosticians NEVER to render in single diagnosis.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 The Hated-Hating Personality Disordered}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
Personality disordered people are usually hated. One needs only to read professional texts to see
 how despised, derided, hated and avoided the personality disordered are even by the therapeutic professions. Because many people don't even realise that they suffer from a personality disorder \endash 
 they feel victimised, wronged, discriminated against and hopeless. They don't understand why they are so hated, avoided and abandoned. They define themselves as victims and attribute mental disorders to others ("pathologising").}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 They employ the prim
itive defence mechanisms of splitting and projection augmented by the more sophisticated mechanism of projective identification.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 In other words:}{
\par }{\cgrid0 They "split-off" from their personality the bad feelings of hating and being hated \endash  because they cannot cope with negative feelings.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Then, they project these feelings unto others ("He hates me, I don't hate anyone", "I am a good soul, but he is a psychopath", "He is stalking me, I just want to stay away from him", "He is a con-artist, I am the innocent victim").}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Then they FORCE others to behave in a way that JUSTIFIES their projections and models (projective identification followed by counter projective identification).}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Some narcissists, for instance, firmly "believe" that women are evil predators, out to suck thei
r lifeblood and then abandon them. So, they try and make them fulfil the prophecy. They try and make sure that women behave exactly in this manner, that they do not abnegate and ruin the model that the narcissist so craftily, so elaborately and so studiou
sly designed.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Such narcissists tease women and betray them and bad mouth them and taunt them and torment them and stalk them and haunt them and pursue them and subjugate them and frustrate them until they do abandon them.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 At this stage the narcissist feels vindicated \endash  not realising HIS contribution to this recurrent pattern.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The personality disordered are full of negative emotions. They are filled to the brim with aggression and its transmutations, hatred and pathological envy. They are constantly seething 
with rage, repressed anger, jealousy and other corroding emotions. Unable to release these emotions (personality disorders are defence mechanisms against "forbidden" emotions) \endash 
 they split them, project them and force others to behave in a way which LEGITIMISES and EXPLAINS these negative emotions. "No wonder I hate him so \endash 
 look what he did to me." The personality disordered are doomed to inhabit the land of self-inflicted injuries. They generate the very hate that legitimises their hate, which generated the hate in the first place.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 The Borderline Narcissist \endash  A Psychotic?}{

\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
Kernberg came up with the borderline diagnosis. It is somewhere between psychotic and neurotic (actually between psychotic and the personality disordered). The differentiation is this:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Neurotic \endash  autoplastic defences (something's wrong with me).}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Personality disordered \endash  alloplastic defences (something's wrong with the world).}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Psychotics \endash  something's wrong with those who say that something's wrong with me.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 ALL personality disorders h
ave a clear psychotic streak. Borderlines have psychotic episodes. Narcissists react with psychosis to life crises and in treatment ("psychotic microepisodes" which can last...days!!!).}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Narcissism \endash  The Root of All Evil}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Pathological narcissism is considere
d by some to be the phenomenon underlying most mental disorders. I describe how pathological narcissism develops into various personality disorders in FAQs 41 and 42. All personality disorders are either variations on a theme or appear intermingled. Thus,
 a SINGLE mental health category with different axes and intensities would have been a more appropriate ("process-orientated") approach, to my mind.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 I think that all Cluster B Personality Disorders (being more mean than arrogant, for instance, is called Ant
isocial Personality Disorder and being more haughty than mean is called Narcissistic Personality Disorder) are arbitrary points in a continuum.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Masochism and Narcissism}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
Isn't seeking punishment a form of assertiveness and self-affirmation if one is a masochist?
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Author Cheryl Glickauf-Hughes, in American Journal of Psychoanalysis, June 97, 57:2, pp 141-148:}{
\par }{\i\cgrid0 "Masochists tend to defiantly assert themselves to the narcissistic parent in the face of criticism and even abuse. For example, one masochistic patient'
s narcissistic father told him as a child that if he said 'one more word' that he would hit him with a belt and the patient defiantly responded to his father by saying 'One more word!' Thus, what may appear, at times, to be masochistic or self-defeating b
ehaviour may also be viewed as self-affirming behaviour on the part of the child toward the narcissistic parent."}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Narcissists and Sexual Perversions}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
Narcissism has long been thought to be a form of paraphilia (sexual deviation or perversion). It has been closely associated with incest (research supports this) and paedophilia (which research does not, as yet, support).
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Incest might be an AUTOEROTIC act and, therefore, narcissistic.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 When a father makes love to his daughter \endash  he is making love to himself because she IS 50% himself. It is a form of masturbation and reassertion of control over oneself.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Homosexuality is NOT a sexual perversion. I analysed the relationship between narcissism and homosexuality in FAQ 8.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Hysteroid Dysphoria
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\i\cgrid0 A short dialogue regarding FAQ 10.}{\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  Sam, you're describing here what the empirical-descriptive folks have called "hysteroid dysphoria" (among other things).
\par }{\b\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  No, I am not. I am describing the narcissist's pattern of reaction to deficient Narcissistic Supply.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 A personality di
sorder is a COMPLEX of hundreds of separate behaviours. Surely, each behaviour pattern taken separately can have a different label. Moreover, the same behaviour pattern can (and often does) occur in a few mental health disorders. For instance, "hysteroid 
dysphoria" (I am not a fan of this "definition") is also a part of the cyclothimic disorder. But, in the CONTEXT of the Narcissistic Personality Disorder what I describe in FAQ 10 is one of a group of recurrent dysphorias identified as early as 1960.

\par Additionally, do not forget that the Narcissistic PD has finally crystallised as a mental health diagnostic category in 1980. "Discoveries" from 1969 \endash  preceding Kohut, Kernberg and even early Millon \endash 
 are absolutely irrelevant in view of today's understanding of narcissism.
\par Below, I outline the differences based on the text you chose.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0 
 It's atypical depression (a specific subtype of non-melancholic depression) with narcissistic/histrionic/borderline "personality" features. A characterisation [from "Atypical Depression" \endash  Quitkin et al \endash 
 in "Clinical Advances in Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitor Therapies", Kennedy ed.]: }{\i\cgrid0 "In 1969, Klein and Davis described a group of patients referred to as `hysteroid dysphorics'. These patients were characterised by strong desire f
or attention and applause, positive response to amphetamines, and a marked rejection sensitivity (especially in romantic contexts)."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  Narcissists do not react only to rejection. They react to any input \endash  verbal, nonverbal, social, implied, real or imagined \endash 
 which is deemed by them to be incommensurate with their inflated self-image. Often, narcissists react badly to ACCEPTANCE and LOVE rather than to rejection because they have a self-image as mean, vicious, frightening, etc.
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 XXX}{\i\cgrid0  (still quoting)}{\b\i\cgrid0 :}{\cgrid0  }{\i\cgrid0 "Leading to frequent depressive episodes."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  The narcissist is mostly ego-syntonic (this is why treatment fails in most cases). His dysphorias are so rare and "reactive" (I don't find the term "reactive" particularly instructive either) that they have been c
lassified and characterised with great ease. He is more likely to react with narcissistic rage to rejection of the type described above.
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  }{\i\cgrid0 "Features of these depressive episodes frequently included loss of ability to anticipate but not experience pleasure."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0 
 One of the major differentiating factors: narcissists do not experience serious, prolonged anhedonia. They immediately distort cognitive input to fit their self-image (It was discovered that they enhance positive inputs rather than reject negative ones).

\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  }{\i\cgrid0 "Hyperphagia or craving for sweets."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  Never noted in narcissists \endash  but research is rather lacking, I admit.
\par }{\b\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  }{\i\cgrid0 "Hypersomnolence, lethargy or inertia, and marked reactivity of mood."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  These are classic depressive signs. They describe well a major depressive episode, cyclothimia, dysthimia and other types of depression.
\par }{\b\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  "}{\i\cgrid0 Onset frequently occurred in adolescence without a history of adequate premorbid functioning."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{\b\cgrid0 Sam: }{\cgrid0 Onset of narcissism AND its dyphorias is at age 2-4. Klein talks about age 6 months and she has a depressive construct [see FAQ 38].
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 True, the PD itself sets on in early adolescence.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  Another interesting feature is, in addition to the general hyperphag
ia, specific cravings for chocolate (and amphetamines). There is a link to family history of alcoholism (not necessarily in the family of origin). It's thought to be related to a dysregulation in the systems governing reward.
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  No such connections have been discovered in research. Narcissists are often prone to substance abuse, though (dual diagnosis).
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 XXX:}{\cgrid0  Personally I don't think it's useful to label these folks as personality-disordered ("especially" narcissistic), as it tends to stigmatise them, as w
ell as depriving them of potentially useful medical interventions (response rates to MAOIs, for example, are comparable to those of melancholic depressives). I'm sure that a lot of them do have chaotic childhoods, but then again, a lot of people with chao
tic childhoods DON'T grow up to become hysteroid dysphorics, so there has to be more to it than just that, even if it does play some role. The use of the word "hysteroid" emphasises this \endash 
 it LOOKS like what we assume is a "personality" disorder, but it isn't safe to assume that it IS a PD.
\par }{\b\i\cgrid0 Sam:}{\cgrid0  No one diagnoses someone as a narcissist just because he is sad.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 FAQ 10 that you are referring to is one of many FAQs. Narcissism is a hypercomplex phenomenon.
\par }{I didn't suggest that anyone who matches FAQ 10 is a narcissist (=didn't label and stigmatise them, though I do not regard a mental health diagnosis as a stigma) \endash  I suggested that many narcissists match the behaviours described in FAQ 10.
\par 
\par }{\cgrid0 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 The Inverted Narcissist \endash  A Masochist?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 The "inverted narcissist" (IN) is described in great detail in FAQ 37.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 The IN is much closer to being a co-dependent than a masochist.
\par Masochism is a whole different ballgame. Strictly speaking it is only of a sexual nature (as in sado-masochism). But the colloquial term means "seeking gratification through pain".
\par This is not the case with co-dependents or IN. The latter is a specific variant of codependent that derives gratification from a relationship with a narcissist or an Antisocial Personality Disordered partner. But the gratificat
ion has nothing to do with the (very real) emotional (and, at times, physical) pain inflicted upon the IN.
\par Rather, in the case of the IN, the gratification has to do with shadows of the past re-awakened. In the narcissist, the IN feels that he found a lost
 parent. The IN seeks to re-enact old unresolved conflicts through the agency of the narcissist. There is a latent hope that this time, the IN will get it "right", that THIS emotional liaison or interaction will not end in bitter disappointment and lastin
g agony.
\par Yet, by choosing a narcissist, the IN ensures an identical outcome of his relationships time and again. Why should one elect to FAIL in his or her relationships, is an intriguing question. Partly, it is the comfort of familiarity. The IN is used \endash  
since childhood \endash 
 to failing relationships. It seems that the IN prefers predictability to emotional gratification and to personal development. There are also strong elements of self-punishment and self-destruction added to the combustible mix that is the 
dyad narcissist-inverted narcissist.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 NPD, AsPD
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
The important differences between narcissism and the Antisocial Personality Disorder (AsPD or psychopaths, in the old terminology) are:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Inability or unwillingness to control impulses (AsPD);
\par \bullet \tab Enhanced lack of empathy on the part of the AsPD;
\par \bullet \tab Inability to form relationships with other humans, not even the narcissistically twisted types of relationships;
\par \bullet \tab Total disregard for society, its conventions, social cues and social treaties.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 As opposed to what Scott Peck says, narcissists are not evil \endash  they lack the intention to cause harm.
\par They are simply indifferent, callous and careless in their conduct and in their treatment of their fellow humans.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 \page 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 43
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Eating Disorders and the Narcissist}{\cgrid0 
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Question:}{ Do narcissists also suffer from eating disorders such as bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa?}{\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Answer:}{ Patients suffering from eating disorders binge on food and sometimes are both anorectic and bulimic. This is an impulsi
ve behaviour as defined by the DSM (particularly in the case of BPD and to a lesser extent of Cluster B disorders in general). Some patients adopt these disorders as a way to self-mutilate. It is a convergence of two pathological behaviours: self-mutilati
on and an impulsive (rather, compulsive or ritualistic) behaviour.}{\cgrid0 
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
The key to improving the mental state of patients with dual diagnosis (a personality disorder plus an eating disorder) lies in concentrating upon their eating and sleeping disorders. In my view, these disorders are a blessing in disguise.}{\cgrid0 
\par }{By controlling their eating disorders, patients assert control over their lives. This is bound to reduce their depression (even eliminate it altogether as a constant feature of their mental life). This is li
kely to ameliorate other facets of their personality disorders. Here is the chain: controlling one's eating disorders }{{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 224 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 9}{\fldrslt\f14\fs18}}}{ controlling one's life }{{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 224 \\f 
"Wingdings" \\s 9}{\fldrslt\f14\fs18}}}{ a sense of self-worth, self-confidence, self-esteem }{{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 224 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 9}{\fldrslt\f14\fs18}}}{ a challenge, an interest, an enemy to subjugate }{{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 224 \\f 
"Wingdings" \\s 9}{\fldrslt\f14\fs18}}}{ a feeling of strength }{{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 224 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 9}{\fldrslt\f14\fs18}}}{ socialising }{{\field{\*\fldinst SYMBOL 224 \\f "Wingdings" \\s 9}{\fldrslt\f14\fs18}}}{ feeling better.}{\cgrid0 

\par }{When a patient ha
s a personality disorder and an eating disorder, the therapist should concentrate on the eating disorder. Personality disorders are intricate and intractable. They are rarely curable (though certain aspects, like OCD, or depression can be ameliorated with
 
medication). Their treatment calls for the enormous, persistent and continuous investment of resources of every kind by everyone involved. From the patient's point of view, the treatment of her personality disorder is not an efficient allocation of scarce
 mental resources. Also personality disorders are not the real threat. If a patient with a personality disorder is cured of it but her eating disorders are aggravated, she might die (though mentally healthy)...}{\cgrid0 
\par }{An eating disorder is both a signal of distres
s ("I wish to die, I feel so bad, somebody help me") and a message: "I think I lost control. I am very afraid of losing control. I will control my food intake and discharge. This way I control at least ONE aspect of my life."}{\cgrid0 
\par }{This is where we can and shoul
d begin to help the patient. Help him to regain control. The family or other supporting figures must think what they can do to make the patient feel that he is in control, that he manages things his own way, that he is contributing, has his own schedules,
 his own agenda, possesses both authority and responsibility.}{\cgrid0 
\par }{Eating d
isorders indicate the strong combined activity of an underlying sense of lack of personal autonomy and an underlying sense of lack of self-control. The patient feels inordinately, paralysingly helpless and ineffective. His eating disorders are an effort t
o exert and reassert mastery over his own life. At this stage, he is unable to differentiate his own feelings and needs from those of others. His cognitive and perceptual distortions (for instance, regarding body image \endash 
 somatoform disorders) only increase his feeling of personal ineffectiveness and his need to exercise even more self-control (of his diet, the only thing left).}{\cgrid0 
\par }{The patient does not trust himself AT ALL, not in the slightest. He is his worst enemy, a mortal enemy, and he knows it. Therefore, any efforts to collaborate with HIM against his disorder \endash 
 are perceived by him as collaboration with his worst enemy against his only mode of controlling his life to some extent.}{\cgrid0 
\par }{The patient views the world in terms of black and white, of absolutes. So, he cannot let go even to a very small degree. He is HORRIFIED \endash 
 constantly. This is why he finds it impossible to form relationships: he mistrusts (himself and by extension others), he does not want to become an adult, he does not enjoy sex or love (which b
oth entail a modicum of a loss of control). All this leads to a chronic absence of self-esteem. These patients like their disorder. Their eating disorder is their only achievement in life. Otherwise they are ashamed of themselves and disgusted by their sh
ortcomings (expressed through shame and disgust directed at their bodies).}{\cgrid0 
\par }{There is a chance to cure the patient of his eating disorders (though the dual diagnosis of eating disorder and personality disorder has a poor prognosis). This \endash  and ONLY this \endash  mus
t be done at the first stage. The patient's family or closest should consider therapy AND support groups (the equivalent of Alcoholics Anonymous or a 12 step program for eating disorders). Recovery prognosis is good after 2 years of treatment and support.
 The family must be heavily involved in the therapeutic process. Family dynamics usually contribute to the development of such disorders.}{\cgrid0 
\par }{Medication + cognitive or behavioural therapy + psychodynamic therapy + family therapy ought to do it.}{\cgrid0 
\par }{The change in th
e patient IF the treatment of his eating disorders is successful is VERY MARKED. His major depression disappears together with his sleeping disorders. He becomes socially active again and gets a life. His personality disorder might make it difficult for h
im \endash  but, in isolation, without the exacerbating circumstances of his other disorders, he finds it much easier to cope with.}{\cgrid0 
\par }{Patients with eating disorders may be in mortal danger. Their behaviour is ruining their bodies relentlessly and inexorably. They mi
ght attempt suicide. They might do drugs. It is only a question of time. Our goal is to buy them time. The older they get, the more experienced they become, the more their body chemistry changes with age \endash  the better their prognosis.}{\cgrid0 

\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 \page 
\par 
\par }{
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 48
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {How to Recognise a Narcissist?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Question:}{ How to recognise a narcissist before it is "too late"?
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Answer:}{ Many of my correspondents complain of the incredible deceptive powers of the narcissist. They found themselves involved with narc
issists (emotionally, in business, or otherwise) before they had a chance to discover his true character. Shocked by the later discovery, they mourn their inabilities: their current inability to separate from him and their past inability to see through hi
m. Narcissists are perceived as such only post facto and when it is too late.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {There is no need to rehash the classic symptoms of the narcissistic personality.
\par These are enumerated in the DSM-IV and are studied at length in this book. We are evidently looking for the more subtle, almost subliminal, signals that a narcissist emits. The psychotherapist would be looking for the "presenting symptoms".
\par One should look for the following:
\par }{\i "Haughty" body language}{ \endash 
 A physical posture implying and exuding an air of superiority, seniority, hidden powers, mysteriousness, amused indifference, etc. Rarely does the narcissist engage in eye contact and normally he refrains from bodily contact, physical proximity, or from 
engaging in a discussion unless from a state of condescension, faked "magnanimity and largesse". He rarely mingles socially and prefers to adopt the stance of the "observer" or the "lone wolf".
\par }{\i Entitlement markers}{ \endash  The narcissist immediately asks for "spec
ial treatment" of some kind. Not to wait his turn, to have a longer or a shorter therapeutic session, to talk directly to authority figures (and not to their assistants or secretaries), to have special payment terms, custom tailored arrangements, special 
attention by the head waiter in a restaurant and so on. He reacts with rage and indignantly if denied his wishes.
\par }{\i Idealisation or devaluation}{ \endash  The narcissist instantly idealises or devalues, depending on his appraisal of the potential one has as a Narcissi
stic Supply Source. He IMMEDIATELY flatters, adores, admires and applauds the "target" in an embarrassingly exaggerated and profuse manner \endash 
 or sulk, abuse and humiliate. In the second case (devaluation) he may force himself to be polite (because of the pr
esence of a potential Supply Source). But this is bound to be a barbed sort of politeness, which rapidly deteriorates and degenerates into verbal or other violent displays of abuse, rage attacks, or cold detachment, totally out of the control of the narci
ssist.
\par }{\i The "membership" posture}{ \endash 
 The narcissist always tries to "belong". Yet, at the very same time, he maintains his stance as an outsider. The narcissist seeks to be admired for his ability to integrate and ingratiate himself without the efforts commens
urate with such an undertaking. For instance: if he talks to a psychologist, the narcissist makes clear that he never studied psychology and then proceed to use the most obscure professional jargon, in an effort to prove that he mastered the discipline (i
.
e., that he is exceptionally intelligent or introspective). In general, the narcissist always prefers show-off to substance. One of the most effective methods of exposing a narcissist is by trying to go deeper and discuss substantial matters. The narcissi
st is shallow, a pond pretending to be an ocean. He likes to think of himself as a Renaissance man, a Jack of all knowledge. A narcissist will never admit to ignorance IN ANY FIELD!
\par }{\i Bragging and false autobiography}{\b  \endash  }{The narcissist brags. His speech is pepp
ered with "I", "my", "myself", "mine" and other appropriating linguistic structures. He describes himself as intelligent, or rich, or modest, or intuitive, or creative \endash 
 but always excessively and extraordinarily so. One is almost tempted to say, inhumanly so. His biography sounds implausibly rich and complex. His achievements \endash 
 incommensurate with his age, education, or recognition. His actual state always appears evidently and demonstrably incompatible with his claims. Very often, the narcissist lies or fantasises in a manner very easy to discern. He always name-drops.
\par }{\i Emotion-free language}{ \endash  The narcissist likes to talk about himself and only about himself. He is disinterested in what others have to tell him about themselves. He might pretend to be interested \endash 
 but this is only with a potential Source of Supply and in order to obtain said sup
ply. He acts bored, disdainful, even angry, if he feels intrusion and abuse of his precious time. In general, the narcissist is a very impatient person, easily bored, with strong attention deficits \endash 
 unless and until he is the topic of discussion. One can 
discuss all the aspects of the intimate life of a narcissist, providing the discourse is not "emotionally tinted". If asked to relate directly to his emotions, he will, probably, intellectualise, rationalise, speak about himself in the third body and in a
 detached "scientific" tone or write a short story with a fictitious character in it, suspiciously autobiographical.
\par }{\i Seriousness and sense of intrusion and coercion}{ \endash  The narcissist is dead serious about himself. He may possess a fabulous sense of humour, s
cathing and cynical. But he never appreciates it when this weapon is directed at him. The narcissist regards himself as being on a constant mission, whose importance is cosmic and whose consequences are global. If a scientist \endash 
 he is always in the throes of revolutionising science. If a journalist \endash 
 he is in the middle of the greatest story ever. This self-misperception is not amenable to light-headedness or self-deprecation. The narcissist is easily hurt and insulted (narcissist hurt or narcissistic injury
). Even the most innocuous remarks or acts are interpreted by him as belittling, intruding, or coercive. His time is more valuable than others' \endash 
 therefore, it cannot be wasted on unimportant matters such as social intercourse. Any suggestion to help, any advice or concerned inquiry are immediately interpreted as coercion. Any attempt to set an agenda \endash 
 as an intimidating act of enslavement. In this sense, the narcissist is both schizoid and paranoid.
\par These \endash  the lack of empathy, the aloofness, the disdain and sense of entitlement, the restricted application of his sense of humour, the unequal treatment and paranoia \endash 
 make the narcissist a social misfit. The narcissist is able to provoke in his social milieu, in his casual acquaintances, even in his psychoth
erapist, the strongest, most avid and furious hatred and revulsion. He provokes violence, often not knowing why. He is perceived to be asocial at best (often \endash 
 antisocial). This, perhaps, is the strongest presenting symptom. One feels ill at ease in the presence of a narcissist \endash 
 and rarely knows why. No matter how charming, intelligent, thought provoking, outgoing, easy going and social the narcissist is \endash  he forever fails to secure the sympathy of his fellow humans, a sympathy he is never ready, willing, 
or able to grant them in the first place.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 56
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 The Narcissist in a Workplace}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Question:}{\cgrid0  The narcissist turns the workplace into a duplicitous hell. What to do?}{
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Answer:}{\cgrid0 
 To a narcissist-employer, the members of his "staff" are Secondary Sources of Narcissistic Supply. Their role is to accumulate the supply (in human speak, remember events that support the grandiose self-image of the narcissist) and to regulate the Narcis
s
istic Supply of the narcissist during dry spells (simply put, to adulate, adore, admire, agree, provide attention and approval and so on or, in other words, be an audience). The staff (or should we say "stuff"?) is supposed to remain passive. The narcissi
s
t is not interested in anything but the simplest function of mirroring. When the mirror acquires a personality and a life of its own, the narcissist is incensed. When independent minded, an employee might be in danger of being sacked by his employer (an a
ct which demonstrates the employer's omnipotence).}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 
The employee's presumption to be the employer's equal (friendship is possible only among equals) injures the latter narcissistically. The employer is willing to accept his employees as underlings, whose ver
y position serves to support his grandiose fantasies. But the grandiosity rests on such fragile foundations, that any hint of equality, disagreement or need (that the narcissist "needs" friends, for instance) threatens the narcissist profoundly. The narci
ssist is exceedingly insecure. It is easy to destabilise his impromptu "personality". His reactions are merely in self-defence.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Classic narcissistic behaviour is when idealisation is followed by devaluation. The devaluing attitude develops as a result of disagreements OR simply because time has eroded the employee's capacity to serve as a FRESH Source of Supply.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The employee, taken for granted by the narcissistic employer, becomes uninspiring as a source of adulation, admiration and attention. The narcissist always seeks new thrills and stimuli.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The narcissist is notorious for his low threshold of resistance to boredom. His behaviour is impulsive and his biography tumultuous precisely because of his need to introduce uncertainty and risk to what he regards as
 "stagnation" or "slow death" (i.e., routine). Most interactions in the workplace are part of the rut \endash  and thus constitute a reminder of this routine \endash  deflating the narcissist's grandiose fantasies.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Narcissists do many unnecessary, wrong and even dangerous things in pursuit of the stabilisation of their inflated self-image.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Narcissists feel suffocated by intimacy, or by the constant reminders of the REAL, nitty-gritty world. It reduces them, makes them realise the Grandiosity Gap (between their self-image
 and reality). It is a threat to the precarious balance of their personality structures (mostly "false", that is, invented) and treated as such.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Narcissists forever shift the blame, pass the buck, and engage in cognitive dissonance. They "pathologise" the other, foster feelings of guilt and shame in her, demean, debase and humiliate in order to preserve their sense of grandiosity.
\par Narcissists are pathological liars. They think nothing of it because their very self is FALSE, an invention.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Here are a few useful guidelines:}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi-142\li312\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin312\itap0 {\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Never disagree with the narcissist or contradict him;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Never offer him any intimacy;}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Look awed by whatever attribute matters to him (for instance: by his professional achievements or by his good looks, or by his success with women and so on);}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Never remind him of life out there and if you do, connect it somehow to his sense of grandiosity ("These are the BEST art materials ANY workplace is going to have", "We get them EXCLUSIVELY", etc.);}{
\par }{\cgrid0 \bullet \tab Do not make any comment, which might directly 
or indirectly impinge on his self-image, omnipotence, judgement, omniscience, skills, capabilities, professional record, or even omnipresence. Bad sentences start with: "I think you overlooked ... made a mistake here ... you don't know ... do you know ...
 
you were not here yesterday so ... you cannot ... you should ... (perceived as rude imposition, narcissists react very badly to restrictions placed on their freedom) ... I (never mention the fact that you are a separate, independent entity, narcissists re
gard others as extensions of their selves, their internalisation processes were derailed and they did not differentiate properly)..." You get the gist of it.}{
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 67
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Vindictive Narcissists}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Question:}{\cgrid0  Are narcissists vindictive? Do they stalk and harass?}{
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Answer:}{\cgrid0  Narcissists are often vindictive and they often stalk and harass.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Basically, there are only two ways of coping with vindictive narcissists:}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {I. }{\cgrid0 To Frighten Them}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Narcissists live in a state of co
nstant rage, repressed aggression, envy and hatred. They firmly believe that everyone is like them. As a result, they are paranoid, suspicious, scared and erratic. Frightening the narcissist is a powerful behaviour modification tool. If sufficiently deter
red \endash  the narcissist promptly disengages, gives up everything he was fighting for and sometimes make amends.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 To act effectively, one has to identify the vulnerabilities and susceptibilities of the narcissist and strike repeated, escalating blows at them 
\endash  until the narcissist lets go and vanishes.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Example:}{
\par }{\cgrid0 If a narcissist is hiding a personal fact \endash  one should use this to threaten him. One should drop cryptic hints that there are mysterious witnesses to the events and recently revealed evidence. The narcissi
st has a very vivid imagination. Let his imagination do the rest.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The narcissist may have been involved in tax evasion, in malpractice, in child abuse, in infidelity \endash  there are so many possibilities, which offer a rich vein of attack. If done cleverly, no
n-committally, gradually, in an escalating manner \endash 
 the narcissist crumbles, disengages and disappears. He lowers his profile thoroughly in the hope of avoiding hurt and pain. Most narcissists have been known to disown and abandon a whole PNS (Pathological
 Narcissistic Space) in response to a well-focused campaign by their victims. Thus, a narcissist may leave town, change a job, desert a field of professional interest, avoid friends and acquaintances \endash 
 only to secure a cessation of the unrelenting pressure exerted on him by his victims.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 I repeat: most of the drama takes place in the paranoid mind of the narcissist. His imagination runs amok. He finds himself snarled by horrifying scenarios, pursued by the vilest "certainties". The narcissist is his own wors
t persecutor and prosecutor.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 You don't have to do much except utter a vague reference, make an ominous allusion, delineate a possible turn of events. The narcissist will do the rest for you. He is like a little child in the dark, generating the very monste
rs that paralyse him with fear.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Needless to add that all these activities have to be pursued legally, preferably through the good services of law offices and in broad daylight. If done in the wrong way \endash  they might constitute extortion or blackmail, harass
ment and a host of other criminal offences.}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {II. }{\cgrid0 To Lure Them}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 
The other way to neutralise a vindictive narcissist is to offer him continued Narcissistic Supply until the war is over and won by you. Dazzled by the drug of Narcissistic Supply \endash  the narcissist
 immediately becomes tamed, forgets his vindictiveness and triumphantly takes over his "property" and "territory". Under the influence of Narcissistic Supply, the narcissist is unable to tell when he is being manipulated. He is blind, dumb and deaf to all
 but the song of the NS sirens. You can make a narcissist do ANYTHING by offering, withholding, or threatening to withhold Narcissistic Supply (adulation, admiration, attention, sex, awe, subservience, etc.).}{
\par \page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 69
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {How to Cope with a Narcissist?
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par No one bears any responsibility whatsoever for the narcissist's predicament. To him, others hardly exist \endash  so enmeshed he is in himself and in the resulting misery of this very self-preoccupation. Ot
hers are hangers on which he hangs the clothes of wrath, of rage, of suppressed and mutating aggression and, finally, of ill disguised violence. How should the persons nearest and dearest to the narcissist cope with his eccentric vagaries?
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The short answer
 is by abandoning him or by threatening to abandon him. The threat to abandon need not be explicit or conditional ("If you don't do something or if you do it \endash 
 I will desert you"). It is sufficient to confront the narcissist, to insist, to shout back. The 
narcissist is tamed by the very same weapons that he uses to subjugate others. The spectre of being abandoned looms large over everything else. Every discordant note assumes the monstrous attributes of solitude, abandonment, and the resulting confrontatio
n with his self. The narcissist is a person who is irreparably traumatised by the behaviour of the most important adults in his life: his parents. By being capricious, arbitrary, and sadistically judgemental \endash 
 they moulded him into an adult, who fervently a
nd obsessively tries to recreate the trauma (repetition complex). Thus, on the one hand, the narcissist feels that his liberation depends upon re-living these experiences. On the other hand, he is terrified by this prospect. Realising that he is doomed to
 
go through the same harrowing experience over and over again, the narcissist distances himself from the scene of his own pending emotional catastrophe. He does this by using his aggression to alienate, to humiliate and in general, to be emotionally absent
.
 This behaviour brings about the very consequences that the narcissist so derides. But, this way, at least, the narcissist can tell himself (and others) that HE was the one who controlled the events, that it was truly fully his choice and that he was not 
surprised. The truth is that, governed by his internal demons, the narcissist has no choice to talk about.
\par The narcissist is, therefore, a binary human being: the carrot is the stick in his case. If he gets too close to someone emotionally, he fears ultimat
e and inevitable abandonment. He, thus, distances himself, acts cruelly and brings about the very abandonment that he feared in the first place. In this paradox lies the key to coping with the narcissist: if he has a rage attack \endash 
 rage back. This will provoke in him fears of being abandoned and the resulting calm will be so total that it might seem unbelievable. Narcissists are known for these sudden tectonic shifts in mood and in behaviour patterns.
\par Mirror the narcissist's actions and repeat his words. If he threatens \endash  threaten back and credibly try to use the same language and content. If he leaves the house \endash  leave it as well, disappear on him. If he is suspicious \endash 
 act suspicious. Be critical, denigrating, humiliating, go down to his level \endash  because that is where he permanently is. Faced with his mirror image \endash  the narcissist always recoils.
\par We must not forget: the narcissist does all these things to foster and encourage abandonment. When mirrored, the narcissist dreads imminent and impending abandonment, which is the inevitable result of his actions and words. This prospect so terrifies him 
\endash  that it induces in him an incredible alteration of his behaviour. He instantly succumbs and tries to make amends, moving from one (cold and bitter, cynical and misa
nthropic, cruel and sadistic) pole to another (warm, even loving, the sort of fuzzy, engulfing emotion that we feel on a particularly good or successful day).
\par The other way is to abandon him and go about reconstructing your own life. Very few people deserv
e the kind of investment that is an absolute prerequisite to living with a narcissist. To cope with a narcissist is a full time, energy and emotion-draining job, which reduces the persons around the narcissist to insecure nervous wrecks. Who deserves such
 a sacrifice?
\par No one, to my mind, not even the most brilliant, charming, breathtaking, suave narcissist. The glamour and trickery wear thin and underneath them a monster lurks which sucks the affect, distorts the cognition and irreversibly influences the li
ves of those around it for the worse.
\par Others delineate a more sweeping dichotomous strategy. Both philosophically and pragmatically, we cannot and should not assume responsibility for other people and their lives. Narcissists are incorrigibly and notorious
ly difficult to change. Trying to change them is a bad strategy. The two viable strategies are either to accept them as they are or to avoid them altogether. If one accepts a narcissist as he is \endash 
 one should cater to his needs. His needs are part of what h
e is. Would you have ignored a physical handicap? Would you not have assisted a quadriplegic? The narcissist is an emotional invalid. He needs constant adulation. He cannot help it. So, if one chooses to accept him \endash 
 it is a package deal, all his needs included.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 70
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Narcissists and Women}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Question:}{ Do narcissists hate women?
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i\cgrid0 Answer:}{\cgrid0 
 Narcissists abhor and dread getting emotionally intimate. The cerebral ones regard sex as a maintenance chore, something they have to do in
 order to keep their Source of Secondary Supply. The somatic narcissist treats women as objects and sex as a means to obtaining Narcissistic Supply.}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 Moreover, many narcissists tend to engage in FRUSTRATING behaviours towards women. They refrain from having
 sex with them, tease them and then leave them, resist flirtatious and seductive behaviours and so on. Often, they invoke the existence of a girlfriend/fianc\'e9e/spouse (or boyfriend/etc. \endash 
 male and female are interchangeable in my texts) as the "reason" why
 they cannot have sex/develop a relationship. But this is not out of loyalty and fidelity in the empathic and loving sense. This is because they wish (and often succeed) to sadistically frustrate the interested party.}{
\par BUT
\par }{\cgrid0 This pertains ONLY to cerebral narcissists, but NOT to somatic narcissists and HPDs (Histrionic Personality Disorder) who use their BODY, sex and seduction/flirtation to extract Narcissistic Supply from others.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Narcissists are misogynists. They team up with women as mere Sources of SNS (Se
condary Narcissistic Supply). The woman's chores are to accumulate past NS and release it in an orderly manner, so as to regulate the fluctuating flow of primary supply. Otherwise, cerebral narcissists are not interested in women. Most of them are non-sex
u
al (engage in sexual acts very rarely, if at all). They hold women in contempt and abhor the thought of being really intimate with them. Usually, they choose submissive women, well below their level, to perform these functions. This leads to a vicious cyc
le of neediness, self-contempt ("How come I am dependent on this inferior woman") and contempt directed at the woman. Hence the abuse. When Primary NS is available \endash 
 the woman is hardly tolerated, as one would reluctantly pay the premium of an insurance policy.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The narcissist does regard the "subjugation" of an attractive woman to be a Source of Narcissistic Supply.
\par It is a status symbol, proof of virility and masculinity and it allows him to engage in "vicarious" narcissistic behaviours (=being a narcissist
 through others, transforming others into tools at the service of his narcissism, into his extensions). This is done by employing defence mechanisms such as projective identification. Many of my FAQs and the Essay are dedicated to these issues.
\par To re-iterate, Primary Narcissistic Supply (PNS) is ANY kind of NS provided by others who are not "meaningful" or "significant" others. Adulation, attention, affirmation, fame, notoriety, sexual conquests \endash  are all forms of NS.
\par Secondary NS (SNS) emanates from people who are in CONSTANT, repetitive or continuous touch with the narcissist. It includes the important roles of narcissistic accumulation and narcissistic regulation, among others. [See the Essay for more.]
\par The narcissist believes that being in love IS actually going through the motions and pretending. To him, emotions are mimicry and pretence.
\par }{He says: "I am a conscious misogynist. I fear and loathe women and tend to ignore them to the best of my ability. To me they are a mixture of hunter and parasite."
\par }{\cgrid0 Most
 male narcissists are misogynists. After all, they are the warped creation of a woman. A woman gave birth to them and moulded them into what they are: dysfunctional, maladaptive, emotionally dead. They are angry at this woman and, by implication, mad at a
ll women.
\par The narcissist's attitude to women is, naturally, complex and multi-layered but it can be summarised using four axes:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-227\li397\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin397\itap0 {\cgrid0 1.\tab The Holy Whore}{
\par }{\cgrid0 2.\tab The Hunter Parasite}{
\par }{\cgrid0 3.\tab The Frustrating Object of Desire}{
\par }{\cgrid0 4.\tab Uniqueness Roles}{
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\cgrid0 The narcissist divides all women
 to saints and whores. He finds it difficult to have sex ("dirty", "forbidden", "punishable", "degrading") with feminine significant others (spouse, intimate girlfriend). To him, sex and intimacy are mutually exclusive rather than mutually expressive prop
o
sitions. Sex is reserved to "whores" (all other women in the world). This division provides for a resolution of his constant cognitive dissonance ("I want her but...", "I don't need anyone but..."). It also legitimises his sadistic urges (abstaining from 
sex is a major and recurrent narcissistic "penalty" inflicted on female "transgressors"). It also tallies well with the frequent idealisation-devaluation cycles the narcissist goes through. The idealised females are sexless, the devalued ones \endash 
 "deserving" of their degradation (sex) and the contempt that, inevitably, follows thereafter.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The narcissist believes firmly that women are out to "hunt" men and that this is almost a genetic predisposition. As a result, he feels threatened (as any prey would). This, 
of course, is an intellectualisation of the real, absolutely opposite, state of things: the narcissist feels threatened by women and tries to justify this irrational fear by imbuing women with "objective" qualities which make them, to his mind, ominous. T
his is a small detail in a larger canvass of "pathologising" others as a means of controlling them. According to the narcissist's scenario, once the prey is secured \endash 
 the woman assumes the role of a "body snatcher". She absconds with the narcissist's sperm,
 she generates an endless stream of demanding and nose dripping children, she financially bleeds the men in her life to cater to her needs and to the needs of her dependants. Put differently, she is a parasite, a leech, whose sole function is to suck dry 
every man she finds and tarantula-like decapitate them once no longer useful. This, of course, is exactly what the narcissist does to people. Thus, his view of women is a projection.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Heterosexual narcissists desire women as any other red-blooded male does (even more so due to the special symbolic nature of the woman in the narcissist's life \endash 
 humbling a woman in acts of faintly sado-masochistic sex is a way of getting back at mother). But he is frustrated by his inability to meaningfully interact with them, 
by their apparent emotional depth and powers of psychological penetration (real or attributed) and by their sexuality. Their incessant demands for intimacy are perceived by him as a threat. He recoils instead of getting closer. The cerebral narcissist als
o
 despises and derides sex, as we said before. Thus, caught in a seemingly intractable repetition complex, in approach-avoidance cycles, the narcissist becomes furious at the source of his frustration. Some of them set out to do some frustrating of their o
wn. They tease (passively or actively), or they pretend to be non-sexual and, in any case, they turn down, rather cruelly, any attempt by a woman to court them and to get closer.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 Sadistically, they tremendously enjoy their ability to frustrate the desires, 
passions and sexual wishes of women. It endows them with a feeling of omnipotence and with the pleasing realisation of malevolence. Narcissists regularly frustrate all women sexually \endash 
 and engage in frustrating significant women in their lives both sexuall
y and emotionally. Somatic narcissists simply use women as objects and then discard them. The emotional background is identical. While the cerebral narcissist punishes through abstention \endash  the somatic narcissist penalises through excess.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The narcissist's m
other kept behaving as though the narcissist was and is not special (to her). The narcissist's whole life is a pathetic and pitiful effort to prove her wrong. The narcissist constantly seeks confirmation from others that he IS special \endash 
 in other words that
 he IS. Women threaten this. Sex is "bestial" and "common". There is nothing "special or unique" about sex. Women are perceived by the narcissist to be dragging him to their level, the level of the lowest common denominator of intimacy, sex and human emot
i
ons. Everybody and anybody can feel, copulate and breed. There is nothing to set the narcissist apart and above others in these activities. And yet women seem to be interested ONLY in these pursuits. Thus, the narcissist emotionally believes that women ar
e the continuation of his mother by other means and in different guises.}{
\par }{\cgrid0 The narcissist hates women virulently, passionately and uncompromisingly. His hate is primal, irrational, the progeny of mortal fear and sustained abuse. Granted, most narcissists lear
n how to suppress, disguise, even repress these untoward feelings. But their hatred does swing out of control and erupt from time to time. It is a terrifying, paralysing sight. It is the true narcissist.}{
\par To live with a narcissist is an arduous and eroding 
task. Narcissists are atrabilious, infinitely pessimistic, bad-tempered, paranoid and sadistic in an absent-minded and indifferent manner. Their daily routine is a rigmarole of threats, complaints, hurts, eruptions, moodiness and rage. The narcissist rail
s against slights true and imagined. He alienates people. He humiliates them because this is his only weapon against the humiliation of their indifference.
\par Gradually, wherever he is, the narcissist's social circle dwindles and then vanishes. Every narcissist is also a schizoid, to some extent. A schizoid is not a misanthrope. He does not necessarily hate people \endash 
 he simply does not need them. He regards social interactions as a nuisance to be minimised.
\par The narcissist is torn between his need to obtain Narcissistic Supply (monopolised by human beings) \endash  and his fervent wish to be left alone. This wish is peppered with contempt and feelings of superiority.
\par There are fundamental conflicts between dependence and contempt, neediness and devaluation, seeking and a
voiding, turning on the charm to attract adulation and being engulfed by wrathful reactions to the most minuscule "provocations". These conflicts lead to rapid cycling between gregariousness and self-imposed ascetic seclusion.
\par Such an unpredictable but always bilious and festering atmosphere is hardly conducive to love or sex. Gradually, both become extinct. Relationships are hollowed out. Imperceptibly, the narcissist switches to a non-sexual co-habitation.
\par But the vitriolic environment that the narcissist creates is only one hand of the equation. The other hand is the woman herself.
\par As we said, heterosexual narcissists are attracted to women, but simultaneously repelled, horrified, bewitched and provoked by them. They seek to frustrate and humiliate them. Psychodynamically, the narcissist probably visits upon them his mother's sins 
\endash  but such an instant explanation does the subject great injustice.
\par Most narcissists are misogynists. Their sexual and emotional lives are perturbed and chaotic. They are unable to love in any true sense of the word \endash 
 nor are they capable of developing any measure of intimacy. Lacking empathy, they are unable to offer to the partner emotional sustenance.
\par Do narcissists miss loving, would they have liked to love and are they angry with their parents for crippling them so?
\par To the narcissist, these questions are incomprehensible. There is no way they can answer them. Narcissists never love. They do not know what is it that they are supposedly missing. Obse
rving it from the outside, love seems to them to be a risible pathology. They equate love with weakness. They hate being weak and they hate and despise weak people (and, therefore, the very old and the very young). They do not tolerate what they consider 
to be stupidity, disease and dependence \endash  and love seems to encompass all three. These are not sour grapes. They really feel this way.
\par Narcissists are angry men \endash  but not because they never experienced love and probably never will. They are angry because th
ey are not as powerful, awe inspiring and successful as they wish they were and, to their mind, deserve to be. Because their daydreams refuse so stubbornly to come true. Because they are their worst enemy. And because, in their unmitigated paranoia, they 
see adversaries plotting everywhere and feel discriminated against and contemptuously ignored.
\par Many of them (the borderline narcissists) cannot conceive of a life in one place with one set of people, doing the same thing, in the same field with one goal wit
hin a decades-old game plan. To them, this is death. They are most terrified of boredom and whenever faced with its daunting prospect, they inject drama into their life, or even danger. This is the only way some of them can feel alive.
\par The narcissist is a lonely wolf. He is a shaky platform, indeed, on which to base a family, or future plans.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 71
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Spouse/Mate/Partner of the Narcissist
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Question:}{ What kind of a spouse/mate/partner is likely to be attracted to a narcissist?
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Answer:}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Victims
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
On the face of it, there is no (emotional) partner or mate, who typically "binds" with a narcissist. They come in all shapes and sizes. The initial phases of attraction, infatuation and falling in love are pretty normal. The narci
ssist puts on his best face \endash  the other party is blinded by budding love. A natural selection process occurs only much later, as the relationship develops and is put to the test.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Living with a narcissist can be exhilarating, is always onerous, often harrow
ing. Surviving a relationship with a narcissist indicates, therefore, the parameters of the personality of the survivor. She (or, more rarely, he) is moulded by the relationship into The Typical Narcissistic Mate/Partner/Spouse.
\par First and foremost, the narcissist's partner must have a deficient or a distorted grasp of his self and of reality. Otherwise, she (or he) is bound to abandon the narcissist's grip early on. The cognitive distortion is likely to consist of a belittling an
d demeaning of the partner \endash 
 while aggrandising and adoring the narcissist. The partner is, thus, placing himself in the position of the eternal victim: undeserving, punishable, a scapegoat. Sometimes, it is very important to the partner to appear moral, sa
crificial and victimised. At other times, she is not even aware of his predicament. The narcissist is perceived by the partner to be a person in the position to demand these sacrifices from the partner, superior in many ways (intellectually, emotionally, 
morally, financially).
\par The status of professional victim sits well with the partner's tendency to punish his self, namely: with his masochistic streak. The torment, which is life with a narcissist is, as far as the partner is aware, a just punitive measure.
\par In this respect, the partner is the mirror image of the narcissist. By maintaining a symbiotic relationship with him, by being totally dependent upon the source of masochistic supply (which the narcissist most reliably constitutes and most amply provides)
 \endash 
 the partner enhances certain traits and encourages certain behaviours, which are at the very core of narcissism. The narcissist is never whole without an adoring, submissive, available, self-denigrating partner. His very sense of superiority, indeed his
 False Self, depends on it. His sadistic Superego switches its attentions from the narcissist (in whom it often provokes suicidal ideation) to the partner, thus finally obtaining an alternative source of sadistic satisfaction.
\par It is through self-denial tha
t the partner survives. She denies her wishes, hopes, dreams, aspirations, sexual needs, psychological needs, material needs, and much else besides. She perceives her needs as threatening because they might engender the wrath of the narcissist's God-like 
s
upreme figure. The narcissist is rendered even more superior through and because of this self-denial. Self-denial undertaken to facilitate and ease the life of a "great man" is more palatable. The "greater" the man (=the narcissist), the easier it is for 
the partner to ignore her own self, to dwindle, to degenerate, to turn into an appendix of the narcissist and, finally, to become nothing but an extension, to merge with the narcissist to the point of oblivion and of dim memories of one's self.
\par The two coll
aborate in this macabre dance. The narcissist is formed by his partner inasmuch as he forms her. Submission breeds superiority and masochism breeds sadism. The relationships are characterised by rampant emergentism: roles are allocated almost from the sta
rt and any deviation meets with an aggressive, even violent reaction.
\par The predominant state of the partner's mind is utter confusion. Even the most basic relationships \endash  with husband, children, or parents \endash  remain bafflingly obscured by the giant shadows ca
st by the intensive interaction with the narcissist. A suspension of judgement is part and parcel of a suspension of individuality, which is both a prerequisite to and the result of living with a narcissist. The partner no longer knows what is true and ri
g
ht and what is wrong and forbidden. The narcissist recreates for the partner the sort of emotional ambience that led to his own formation in the first place: capriciousness, fickleness, arbitrariness, emotional (and physical or sexual) abandonment. The wo
rld becomes uncertain and frightening and the partner has only one sure thing to cling to: the narcissist.
\par And cling she does. If there is anything which can safely be said about those who emotionally team up with narcissists, it is that they are overtly and overly dependent, even compulsively so.
\par The partner doesn't know what to do \endash  and this is only too natural in the mayhem that is the relationship with the narcissist is. But the typical partner also does not know what she wants and, to a large extent, wh
o she is and what she wants to become.
\par These unanswered questions hamper the partner's ability to gauge reality, evaluate and appraise it for what it is. Her primordial sin is that she fell in love with an image, not with a real person. It is the voiding o
f the image that is mourned when the relationship ends.
\par The break-up of a relationship with a narcissist is, therefore, very emotionally charged. It is the culmination of a long chain of humiliations and of subjugation. It is the rebellion of the functioni
ng and healthy parts of the partner's personality against the tyranny of the narcissist.
\par The partner is liable to have totally misread and misinterpreted the whole interaction (I hesitate to call it a relationship). This lack of proper interface with reality might be (erroneously) labelled "pathological".
\par Why is it that the partner seeks to prolong her pain? What is the source and purpose of this masochistic streak? Upon the break-up of the relationship, the partner (and the narcissist) engage in a tortuous
 and drawn out post mortem. But the question who really did what to whom (and even why) is irrelevant. What is relevant is to stop mourning oneself (this is what the parties are really mourning), start smiling again and love in a less subservient, hopeles
s, and pain-inflicting manner.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Abuse
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Abuse is an integral, inseparable part of the Narcissistic Personality Disorder.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {The narcissist idealises and then DEVALUES and discards the object of his initial idealisation. This abrupt, heartless devaluation IS a
buse. ALL narcissists idealise and then devalue. This is THE core of pathological narcissism. The narcissist exploits, lies, insults, demeans, ignores (the "silent treatment"), manipulates, controls. All these are forms of abuse.
\par There are a million ways t
o abuse. To love too much is to abuse. It is tantamount to treating someone as one's extension, an object, or an instrument of gratification. To be over-protective, not to respect privacy, to be brutally honest, or consistently tactless \endash 
 is to abuse. To expect too much, to denigrate, to ignore \endash 
 are all modes of abuse. There is physical abuse, verbal abuse, psychological abuse, sexual abuse. The list is long. Narcissists are masters of abusing surreptitiously. They are "stealth abusers". You have to actual
ly live with one in order to witness the abuse.
\par There are three important categories of abuse:
\par }\pard \qj \fi-227\li397\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin397\itap0 {\i 1.\tab Overt Abuse}{ \endash 
 The open and explicit abuse of another person. Threatening, coercing, beating, lying, berating, demeaning, chastising, insulting, humiliating, e
xploiting, ignoring ("silent treatment"), devaluing, unceremoniously discarding, verbal abuse, physical abuse and sexual abuse are all forms of overt abuse.
\par }{\i 2.\tab Covert or Controlling Abuse}{ \endash  Narcissism is almost entirely about control. It is a primitive and
 immature reaction to life's circumstances in which the narcissist (usually in his childhood) was rendered helpless. It is about re-asserting one's identity, re-establishing predictability, mastering the environment \endash  human and physical.
\par 3.\tab The bulk of nar
cissistic behaviours can be traced to this panicky reaction to the remote potential for loss of control. Narcissists are hypochondriacs (and difficult patients) because they are afraid to lose control over their body, its looks and its proper functioning.
 They are obsessive-compulsive in their efforts to subdue their physical habitat and render it foreseeable. They stalk people and harass them as a means of "being in touch" \endash  another form of narcissistic control.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {But why the panic?
\par The narcissist is a solipsist. He carries the whole universe in his mind. To him, nothing exists except himself. Meaningful others are his extensions, assimilated by him, internal objects \endash 
 not external ones. Thus, losing control of a significant other \endash  is equivalent to the loss of control of a limb, or of one's brain. It is terrifying. It is paradigm-shattering.
\par Independent or disobedient people evoke in the narcissist the realisation that something is wrong with his worldview, that he is not the centre of the world or its cause and that he cannot control what, to him, are internal representations.
\par To the narcissist, losing control means going insane. Because other people are mere elements in the narcissist's mind \endash  being unable to manipulate them literally means losing it (his mi
nd). Imagine, if you suddenly were to find out that you cannot manipulate your memories or control your thoughts... Nightmarish!
\par Moreover, it is often only through manipulation and extortion that the narcissist can secure his Narcissistic Supply. Controlli
ng his Sources of Narcissistic Supply is a (mental) life or death question for the narcissist. The narcissist is a drug addict (his drug being the NS) and he would go to any length to obtain the next dose.
\par In his frantic efforts to maintain control or re-assert it, the narcissist resorts to a myriad of fiendishly inventive stratagems and mechanisms. Here is a partial list:
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Unpredictability
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The narcissist acts unpredictably, capriciously, inconsistently and irrationally. This serves to demolish in others their carefully crafted worldview. They become dependent upon the next twist and turn of the narcissist, his next inexplicable whim, upon h
is next outburst, denial, or smile. Because he is assumed to be the only one intimately acquainted with his self \endash 
 he becomes the source of certitude and veracity. In other words: the narcissist makes sure that HE is the only reliable existence in the lives of others \endash 
 by shattering the rest of their world through his seemingly insane behaviour. He guarantees his stable presence in their lives \endash  by destabilising their own.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {In the absence of a self, there are no likes or dislikes, preferences, predictable beh
aviour or characteristics. It is not possible to know the narcissist. There is no one there.
\par The narcissist was conditioned \endash  from an early age of abuse and trauma \endash  to expect the unexpected. His was a world in motion where (sometimes sadistically) caprici
ous caretakers and peers often engaged in arbitrary behaviour. He was trained to deny his True Self and nurture a False one.
\par Having invented himself, the narcissist sees no problem in re-inventing that which he designed in the first place. The narcissist is his own creator.
\par Hence his grandiosity.
\par Moreover, the narcissist is a man for all seasons, forever adaptable, constantly imitating and emulating, a human sponge, a perfect mirror, a non-entity that is, at the same time, all entities combined. The narciss
ist is best described by Heidegger's phrase: "Being and Nothingness". Into this reflective vacuum, this sucking black hole, the narcissist attracts the sources of his Narcissistic Supply.
\par To an observer, the narcissist appears to be fractured or discontinuous.
\par Pathological narcissism has been compared to the Dissociative Identity Disorder (formerly the Multiple Personality Disorder). By definition, the narcissist has at least two selves. His personality is very primitive and disorganised. Living with a narc
issist is a nauseating experience not only because of what he is \endash  but because of what he is NOT. He is not a fully formed human \endash 
 but a dizzyingly kaleidoscopic gallery of mercurial images, which melt into each other seamlessly. It is incredibly disorienting.
\par It is also exceedingly problematic. Promises made by the narcissist are easily disowned by him. His plans are ephemeral. His emotional ties \endash 
 a simulacrum. Most narcissists have one island of stability in their life (spouse, family, their career, a hobby, their religion, country, or idol) \endash  pounded by the turbulent currents of a dishevelled existence.
\par Thus, to invest in a narcissist is a purposeless, futile and meaningless activity. To the narcissist, every day is a new beginning, a hunt, a new cycle o
f idealisation or devaluation, a newly invented self. There is no accumulation of credits or goodwill because the narcissist has no past and no future. He occupies an eternal and timeless present. He is a fossil caught in the frozen lava of a volcanic chi
ldhood.
\par The narcissist does not keep agreements, does not adhere to laws, regards consistency and predictability as demeaning traits.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Disproportional Reactions
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
One of the favourite tools of manipulation in the narcissist's arsenal is the disproportionality 
of his reactions. He reacts with supreme rage to the slightest slight. He punishes severely for what he perceives to be an offence against him, no matter how minor. He throws a temper tantrum over any discord or disagreement, however gently and considerat
e
ly expressed. Or he may act inordinately attentive, charming and tempting (even over-sexed, if need be). This ever-shifting conduct coupled with the inordinately harsh and arbitrarily applied "penal code" are both designed by the narcissist and remain ina
ccessible to the "offenders". Neediness and dependence on the source of all justice meted \endash  on the narcissist \endash  are thus guaranteed.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Dehumanisation and Objectification (Abuse)
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {People have a need to believe in the empathic skills and basic good-heartedness o
f others. By dehumanising and objectifying people \endash  the narcissist attacks the very foundations of the social treaty. This is the "alien" aspect of narcissists \endash 
 they may be excellent imitations of fully formed adults but they are emotionally non-existent, or, at best, immature.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {This is so horrid, so repulsive, so phantasmagoric \endash 
 that people recoil in terror. It is then, with their defences absolutely down, that they are the most susceptible and vulnerable to the narcissist's control. Physical, psychologic
al, verbal and sexual abuse are all forms of dehumanisation and objectification.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Abuse of Information
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
From the first moments of an encounter with another person, the narcissist is on the prowl. He collects information with the intention of applying it later to extract Narcissistic Supply. The more he knows about his potential Source of Supply \endash 
 the better able he is to coerce, manipulate, charm, extort or convert it "to the cause". The narcissist does not hesitate to abuse the information he gleaned, regard
less of its intimate nature or the circumstances in which he obtained it. This is a powerful tool in his armoury.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Impossible Situations
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The narcissist engineers impossible, dangerous, unpredictable, unprecedented, or highly specific situations in which he 
is sorely and indispensably needed. The narcissist, his knowledge, his skills or his traits become the only ones applicable, or the most useful to resolving them. It is a form of control by proxy.
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Control by Proxy
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {If all else fails, the narcissist recru
its friends, colleagues, mates, family members, the authorities, institutions, neighbours \endash  in short, third parties \endash 
 to do his bidding. He uses them to cajole, coerce, threaten, stalk, offer, retreat, tempt, convince, harass, communicate and otherwise man
ipulate his target. He controls these unaware instruments exactly as he plans to control his ultimate prey. He employs the same mechanisms and devices. And he dumps his props unceremoniously when the job is done.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Another form of control by proxy is to engi
neer situations in which abuse is inflicted upon another person. Such carefully crafted scenarios involve embarrassment and humiliation as well as social sanctions (condemnation, opprobrium, or even physical punishment). Society, or a social group become 
the instruments of the narcissist.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Ambient Abuse
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
The fostering, propagation and enhancement of an atmosphere of fear, intimidation, instability, unpredictability and irritation. There are no acts of traceable or provable explicit abuse, nor any manipulative
 settings of control. Yet, the irksome feeling remains, a disagreeable foreboding, a premonition, a bad omen. This is sometimes called "gas-lighting". In the long-term, such an environment erodes one's sense of self-worth and self-esteem. Self-confidence 
i
s shaken badly. Often, the victims adopt a paranoid or schizoid stance and thus render themselves exposed even more to criticism and judgement. The roles are thus reversed: the victim is considered the mentally disordered component of the dyad and the nar
cissist \endash  the suffering soul.
\par \page 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 75
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {The Narcissist and His Family
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Question:}{ Is there a "typical" relationship between the narcissist and his family?
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Answer:}{
 We are all members of a few families in our lifetime: the one that we are born to and the one(s) that we create. We all transfer hurts, attitudes, fears, hopes and desires \endash  a whole emotional baggage \endash 
 from the former to the latter. The narcissist is no exception.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
The narcissist has a dichotomous view of humanity: humans are either Sources of Narcissistic Supply (and, then, idealised and over-valued) or do not fulfil this function (and, therefore, are valueless, devalued). The narcissist gets all the love 
that he needs from himself. From the outside he needs approval, affirmation, admiration, adoration, attention \endash  in other words, externalised Ego boundary functions. He does not require \endash  nor does he seek \endash 
 his parents' or his siblings' love, or to be loved
 by his children. He casts them as the audience in the theatre of his inflated grandiosity. He wishes to impress them, shock them, threaten them, infuse them with awe, inspire them, attract their attention, subjugate them, or manipulate them. He emulates 
and simulates an entire range of emotions and employs every means to achieve these effects. He lies (narcissists are pathological liars \endash 
 their very self is a false one). He plays the pitiful, or, its opposite, the resilient and reliable. He stuns and shine
s with outstanding intellectual, or physical (or anything else appreciated by the members of the family) capacities and achievements. When confronted with (young) siblings or with his own children, the narcissist is likely to undergo three reactive phases
:
\par At first, he perceives his offspring as a threat to his Narcissistic Supply Sources (his turf, the Pathological Narcissistic Space). He does his best to belittle them, hurt (also physically) and humiliate them and then, when these reactions prove ineffect
ive or counter productive, he retreats into an imaginary world of omnipotence. A period of emotional absence and detachment ensues. The narcissist indulges himself in daydreaming, delusions of grandeur, planning of future coups, nostalgia and hurt (the Lo
s
t Paradise Syndrome). The narcissist reacts this way to the birth of his children or to the introduction of new centres of attention to the family cell (even a new pet!). Whatever the narcissist perceives to be his competition for scarce Narcissistic Supp
ly is relegated to the role of the enemy. Where no legitimacy exists for the uninhibited expression of the aggression and hostility aroused by this predicament \endash 
 the narcissist prefers to stay away. He disconnects, detaches himself emotionally, becomes cold and disinterested, directs transformed anger at his mate or at his parents (the more legitimate targets).
\par Other narcissists see the opportunity in the "mishap". They seek to manipulate their parents (or their mate) by "taking over" the newcomer. Such narc
issists monopolise their siblings or their newborn children. This way, indirectly, the narcissist basks in the attention directed at the infant. An example: by being closely identified with his offspring, a narcissistic father secures the grateful admirat
i
on of the mother ("What an outstanding father he is"). He also assumes part of or all the credit for baby's/sibling's achievements. This is a process of annexation and assimilation of the other, a strategy that the narcissist makes use of in most of his r
elationships.
\par As the baby/sibling grows older, the narcissist begins to see their potential to be edifying, reliable and satisfactory Sources of Narcissistic Supply. His attitude, then, is completely transformed. The former threats have now become promising
 potentials. He cultivates those whom he trusts to be the most rewarding. He encourages them to idolise him, to adore him, to be awed by him, to admire his deeds and capabilities, to learn to blindly trust and obey him, in short to surrender to his charis
ma and to become submerged in his folies-de-grandeur. These roles \endash  allocated to them explicitly and demandingly or implicitly and perniciously by the narcissist \endash 
 are best fulfilled by ones whose mind is not fully formed and independent. The older the sibl
ings or offspring, the more they become critical, even judgemental, of the narcissist. They are better able to put into context and perspective his actions, to question his motives, to anticipate his moves. They refuse to continue to play the mindless paw
ns in his chess game. They hold grudges against him for what he has done to them in the past, when they were less capable of resistance. They can gauge his true stature, talents and achievements \endash 
 which, usually, lag far behind the claims that he makes.
\par Thi
s brings the narcissist a full cycle back to the first phase. Again, he perceives his Siblings or sons/daughters as threats. He quickly becomes disillusioned, in one of the spastic devaluation reactions typical of his appraisal of humans around him. He lo
s
es all interest, becomes emotionally remote, absent and cold, rejects any effort to communicate with him, citing life pressures and the preciousness and scarceness of his time. He feels burdened, cornered, besieged, suffocated, and claustrophobic. He want
s
 to get away, to abandon his commitments to people who have become totally useless (or even damaging) to him. He does not understand why he has to support them, to suffer their company and he believes himself to have been trapped. He rebels either passive
ly-aggressively (by refusing to act or intentionally sabotaging the relationships) or actively (by being overly critical, aggressive, unpleasant, verbally and psychologically abusive and so on). Slowly \endash  to justify his acts to himself \endash 
 he gets immersed in 
conspiracy theories with clear paranoid hues. To his mind, the members of the family conspire against him, seek to belittle or humiliate or subordinate him, do not understand him, stymie his growth. The narcissist usually finally gets what he wants and th
e family that he has created disintegrates to his great sorrow (due to the loss of the narcissistic space) \endash  but also to his great relief and surprise (how could they have let go someone as unique as he?).
\par This is the cycle: the narcissist feels threatened by arrival of new family members \endash  assimilation of siblings or offspring \endash  obtaining Narcissistic Supply from them \endash  overvaluation of these new sources by the narcissist \endash 
 as sources grow older and independent, they adopt anti narcissistic behaviours \endash  the narcissist devalues them \endash  the narcissist feels stifled and trapped \endash  the narcissist becomes paranoid \endash 
 the narcissist rebels and the family disintegrates. This cycle characterises not only the family life of the narcissist. It is to be found in other rea
lms of his life (his career, for instance). At work, the narcissist, initially, feels threatened (no one knows him, he is a nobody). Then, he develops a circle of admirers, cronies and friends which he "nurtures and cultivates" in order to obtain Narcissi
stic Supply from them. He overvalues them (they are the brightest, the most loyal, with the biggest chances to climb the corporate ladder and other superlatives).
\par But following some anti-narcissistic behaviours on their part (a critical remark, a disagreement, a refusal, however polite, all constitute such behaviours) \endash 
 the narcissist devalues all these previously over-valued individuals. Now they are stupid, lack a
mbition, skills and talents, common (the worst expletive in the narcissist's vocabulary), with an unspectacular career ahead of them. The narcissist feels that he is misallocating his resources (for instance, his time). He feels besieged and suffocated. H
e rebels and erupts in a serious of self-defeating and self-destructive behaviours, which lead to the disintegration of his life.
\par Doomed to build and ruin, attach and detach, appreciate and depreciate, the narcissist is predictable in his "death wish". What
 sets him apart from other suicidal types is that his wish is granted to him in small, tormenting doses throughout his anguished life.
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\fs16 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 76
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Narcissists, Sex and Fidelity
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Question:}{ Are narcissists mostly hyperactive or hypoactive sexually and to what extent are they likely to be infidel in marriage?
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b\i Answer:}{
 Broadly speaking, there are two types of narcissists loosely corresponding to the two categories mentioned in the question. Sex for the narcissist is an instrument de
signed to increase the number of Sources of Narcissistic Supply. If it happens to be the most efficient weapon in the narcissist's arsenal \endash 
 he will make profligate use of it. In other words: if the narcissist cannot obtain adoration, admiration, approval, applause, or any other kind of attention by other means (e.g., intellectually) \endash 
 he resorts to sex. He then become a satyr (or a nymphomaniac): indiscriminately engages in sex with multiple partners. His sex partners are considered by him to be objects not of desire \endash 
 but of Narcissistic Supply. It is through the processes of successful seduction and sexual conquest that the narcissist derives his badly needed narcissistic "fix". The narcissist is likely to perfect his techniques of courting and regard his
 sexual exploits as a form of art. He is very likely to expose this side of him \endash  in great detail \endash 
 to others, to an audience, expecting to win their approval and admiration. Because the Narcissistic Supply in his case resides in the act of conquest and (what he perceives to be) subordination \endash 
 the narcissist is forced to move on and to switch and bewitch partners very often. The first sexual encounter with a partner always includes these elements \endash  not so the second or third encounters.
\par }\pard \qj \fi170\li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Some narcissists prefer "complicated" situations. If men \endash 
 they prefer virgins, married women, avowed maidens, etc. The more "difficult" the target \endash  the more rewarding the narcissistic outcome. Such a narcissist may be married, but he does not regard his extra-marital affai
rs as either immoral or a breach of any explicit or implicit contract between him and his spouse. He keeps explaining to anyone who cares to listen that his other sexual partners are nothing to him, meaningless, that he is merely taking advantage of them 
a
nd that they do not constitute a threat and should not be taken seriously by his spouse. In his mind a clear separation exists between the honest "woman of his life" (really, a saint) and the whores that he is having sex with. He tends to cast the whole f
eminine sub-species in a bad light (with the exception of the meaningful women in his life). His behaviour will, thus, have achieved a dual purpose: the securing of Narcissistic Supply, on the one hand \endash 
 and bringing about a replay of old, unresolved conflicts and traumas (abandonment and the Oedipal conflict, to mention but two). When inevitably abandoned by his spouse \endash 
 the narcissist is veritably shocked and hurt. This is the sort of crisis, which might drive him to psychotherapy. Still, deep inside, he f
eels compelled to continue to pursue precisely the same path. His abandonment is cathartic, purifying. Following a period of deep depression and suicidal ideation \endash 
 the narcissist is likely to feel cleansed, invigorated, unshackled, ready for the next round of hunting.
\par But there is another type of narcissist. He also has bouts of sexual hyperactivity in which he trades sexual partners and tends to regard them as objects. However, with him, this is a secondary behaviour. It appears mainly after major narciss
istic traumas and crises. A painful divorce, a major personal financial upheaval \endash 
 and this type of narcissist adopts the view that the "old solutions" do not work anymore. He frantically gropes and searches for new ways to attract attention, to restore hi
s False Ego (=his grandiosity) and to secure the subsistence level of Narcissistic Supply. Sex is handy and is a great source of the right kind of supply: immediate, interchangeable, comprehensive (it encompasses all the aspects of the narcissist's being)
, natural, highly charged, adventurous, pleasurable. Thus, following a life crisis, the cerebral narcissist is likely to be deeply involved in sexual activities \endash  very frequently and almost to the exclusion of other matters.
\par However, as the memories of the crisis fade, as the narcissistic wounds heal, as the Narcissistic Cycle re-commences and the balance is restored \endash 
 the second type of narcissist reveals his true colours. He abruptly loses interest in sex and in all his sexual partners. The frequency of his sexual activities deteriorates from a few times a day \endash 
 to a few times a year. He prefers intellectual pursuits, sports, politics, volunteering \endash  anything but sex. This kind of narcissist is afraid of encounters with the opposite sex and is even more afr
aid of emotional involvement or commitment that he fancies himself prone to develop following a sexual encounter. In general, such a narcissist withdraws not only sexually \endash  but also emotionally. If married \endash 
 he loses all overt interest in his spouse, sexu
al or otherwise. He confines himself to his world and makes sure that he is sufficiently busy to preclude any interaction with his nearest (and supposedly dearest). He becomes completely immersed in "big projects", lifelong plans, a vision, or a cause 
\endash  al
l very rewarding narcissistically and all very demanding and time consuming. He then regards sex as an obligation, a necessity, or a maintenance operation needed to preserve the comfortable human cell that he has constructed (his family or household). He 
does not enjoy sex and by far prefers the autoerotic variety \endash  to masturbate \endash 
 or object sex, like going to prostitutes. Actually, he uses his mate or spouse as an "alibi", a shield against the attention of other women, an insurance policy which preserves h
is virile image while making it socially and morally commendable for him to avoid any intimate or sexual contact with other women. Even while ignoring women around him (a form of aggression) he can feel righteous in saying: "I am loyal to my wife". At the
 
same time, he feels hostility towards her for ostensibly preventing him from freely expressing himself sexually with others, for isolating him from carnal pleasures. The thwarted logic goes like this: "I am married/attached to this woman. Therefore, I am 
not allowed to be in any kind of touch with other women, which might be interpreted as more than casual or businesslike. This is why I refrain from having anything to do with women \endash 
 because I am loyal, as opposed to most other immoral men. However, I do not like this situation. I envy my free peers. They can engage in sex and romance as much as they want to \endash 
 while I am confined to this marriage, chained by my wife, my freedom curbed. I am angry at her and I will punish her by abstaining from having sex wit
h her." He minimises all types of intercourse with his close circle (spouse, children, parents, siblings, very intimate friends): sexual, verbal, or emotional. He limits himself to the rawest exchanges of information and isolates himself socially. This wa
y
 he insures against a future hurt and avoids the intimacy that he so dreads. But, again, this way he also secures abandonment and the replay of old, unresolved, conflicts. Finally, he really is left alone by everyone, with no Secondary Sources of Supply. 
I
n his search for them, he again embarks on ego-mending bouts of sex, followed by the selection of a spouse or a mate (a Secondary Narcissistic Supply Source). Then the cycle re-commence: a sharp drop in sexual activity, emotional remoteness and cruel deta
chment leading to abandonment.
\par The second type of narcissist is mostly sexually loyal to his spouse. He alternates between what appears to be hyper-sexuality and non-sexuality (really, forcefully repressed sexuality). In the latter phase, he feels no sexual
 urges, bar the most basic. He is, therefore, not compelled to "cheat" upon his mate, betray her, or violate the marital vows. He is much more interested in preventing a worrisome dwindling of the Narcissistic Supply that really matters. Sex, he says to h
imself, contentedly, is for those who can do no better.
\par I am often asked whether narcissists are some variant of exhibitionists. Somatic narcissists tend to verbal exhibitionism. They tend to brag in graphic details about their conquests and exploits. In ex
treme cases, they might introduce "live witnesses" and revert to total, classical exhibitionism. This sits well with their tendency to "objectify" their sexual partners, to engage in emotionally-neutral sex (group sex, for instance) and to indulge in auto
e
rotic sex. The exhibitionist sees himself reflected in the eyes of the beholders. This constitutes the main sexual stimulus, this is what turns him on. This outside "look" is also what defines the narcissist. There is bound to be a connection. One (the ex
hibitionist) may be the culmination, the "pure case" of the other (the narcissist).
\par }\pard \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\page 
\par 
\par }{\cgrid0 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {THE AUTHOR
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s1\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel0\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs24\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\cgrid0 Shmuel (Sam) Vaknin}{
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s2\qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel1\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs20\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Curriculum Vitae
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par Born in 1961 in Qiryat-Yam, Israel.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Education
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Graduated a few semesters in the Technion }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 \endash }{
 Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa.
\par Ph.D. in Philosophy (major: Philosophy of Physics) \endash  Pacific Western University, California, USA.
\par Graduate of numerous courses in Finance Theory and International Trading.
\par Certified E-Commerce Concepts Analyst.
\par Certified in Psychological Counselling Techniques.
\par Full proficiency in Hebrew and in English.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Business Experience
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1980 to 1983
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Founder and co-owner of a chain of computerised information kiosks in Tel-Aviv, Israel.

\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1982 to 1985
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Senior positions with the Nessim 
D. Gaon Group of Companies in Geneva, Paris and New-York (NOGA and APROFIM SA):
\par \endash  Chief Analyst of Edible Commodities in the Group's Headquarters in Switzerland
\par \endash  Manager of the Research and Analysis Division
\par \endash  Manager of the Data Processing Division
\par \endash  Project Manager of the Nigerian Computerised Census
\par \endash  Vice President in charge of RND and Advanced Technologies
\par \endash  Vice President in charge of Sovereign Debt Financing
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1985 to 1986
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Represented Canadian Venture Capital Funds in Israel.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1986 to 1987
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {General 
Manager of IPE Ltd. in London. The firm financed international multi-lateral counter-trade and leasing transactions.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1988 to 1990
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Co-founder and Director of "Mikbats-Tesuah", a portfolio management firm based in Tel-Aviv.

\par Activities included large-scale portfolio management, underwriting, forex trading and general financial advisory services.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1990 to Present
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
Free-lance consultant to many of Israel's Blue-Chip firms, mainly on issues related to the capital markets in Israel, Canada, the UK and the USA.
\par Consultant to foreign RND ventures and to Governments on macro-economic matters.
\par President of the Israel chapter of the Professors World Peace Academy (PWPA) and (briefly) Israel representative of the "Washington Times".
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1993 to 1994
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Co-owner and Director of many business enterprises:
\par \endash  The Omega and Energy Air-Conditioning Concern
\par \endash  AVP Financial Consultants
\par \endash  Handiman Legal Services \endash  Total annual turnover of the group: 10 million USD.
\par Co-owner, Director and Finance Manager of COSTI Ltd. }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 \endash }{ Israel's largest computerised information vendor and developer. Raised funds through a series of private placements locally, in\~the USA, Canada and London.

\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1995 on
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
Publisher and Editor of a Capital Markets Newsletter distributed by subscription only to dozens of subscribers countrywide.
\par In a legal precedent }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 \endash }{ studied in business schools and law faculties across Israel }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 \endash }{ was tried for his role in an attempted take-over of Israel's Agriculture Bank.

\par Was interned in the State School of Prison Wardens.
\par Managed the Central School Library, wrote, published and lectured on various occasions.
\par Managed the Internet and International News Department of an Israeli mass media group, "Ha-Tikshoret and Namer".
\par Assistant in the Law Faculty in Tel-Aviv University (to Prof. S.G. Shoham).
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1996 to 1999
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {
Financial consultant to leading businesses in Macedonia, Russia and the Czech Republic. Collaborated with the Agency of Transformation of Business with Social Capital.
\par Economic commentator in "Nova Makedonija", "Dnevnik", "Makedonija Denes", "
Izvestia", "Argumenti i Fakti", "The Middle East Times", "The New Presence", "Central Europe Review", "InternetContent.net", United Press International (UPI), other periodicals and in the economic programs on various channels of Macedonian Television.

\par Chief Lecturer in courses organised by the Agency of Transformation, by the Macedonian Stock Exchange and Ministry of Trade.
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb60\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\fs16 1999 to Present
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Economic Advisor to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Author of extensive web sites in:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Psychology ("Malignant Self-Love") \endash 
 An Open Directory Cool Site, Philosophy ("Philosophical Musings"), Economics and Geopolitics ("After the Rain").
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 Owner of the Narcissism Revisited Announcement and Study List (more than 850 members) and the After the Rain CEE and Balkans Announcement and Study List.
\par Editor of mental health disorders and Central and Eastern Europe categories in web directories (Open Directory, Suite 101, Go.com, Search Europe).}{
\par }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 Weekly columnist in "The New Presence", United Press International (UPS), "InternetContent.net" and "Central Europe Review".}{
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Publications and Awards
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {"Managing Investment Portfolios in States of Uncertainty", Limon Publishers, 1988;
\par "The Gambling Industry", Limon Publishers, 1990;
\par "Requesting my Loved One }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 \endash }{ Short Stories", Yedioth Aharonot, 1997;
\par "The Macedonian Economy at a Crossroads \endash  On the Way to a Healthier Economy", (Dialogues with Mr. Nikola Gruevski), 1998;
\par "Malignant Self-Love \endash  Narcissism Revisited", Narcissus Publications, 1999, 2001;
\par "The Exporters' Pocketbook", Ministry of Trade, Republic of Macedonia, 1999;
\par "The Suffering of Being Kafka" (electronic book of Hebrew Short Fiction);
\par "After the Rain \endash  How the West Lost the East", Narcissus Publications }{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033 in association with Central Europe Review / CEENMI}{, 2000.
\par Winner of numerous awards, among them the Israeli Education Ministry Prize (Literature) \endash  1997, The Rotary Club Award for Social Studies \endash  1976, and the Bilateral Relations Studies Award of the American Embassy in Israel \endash  1978.

\par Hundreds of professional articles in all fields of finances and the economy.
\par Numerous articles dealing with geopolitical and political economic issues published in both print and web periodicals in many countries.
\par Many appearances in the electronic media on subjects in philosophy and the sciences and concerning economic matters.
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Write to Me:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {palma@unet.com.mk
\par samvak@briefcase.com
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel2\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {My Web Sites:
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Economy / Politics:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst { HYPERLINK "http://samvak.tripod.com/guide.html" }{{\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002400000068007400740070003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f00670075006900640065002e00680074006d006c000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b48000000680074007400
70003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f00670075006900640065002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {http://samvak.tripod.com/guide.html}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Psychology:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst {HYPERLINK "http://samvak.tripod.com/index.html"}{{\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000003000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b4800000068007400740070003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f0069006e006400650078002e00680074006d006c00000000}}}{\fldrslt {
http://samvak.tripod.com/index.html}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Philosophy:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst {HYPERLINK "http://samvak.tripod.com/culture.html"}{{\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000003000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b4c00000068007400740070003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f00630075006c0074007500720065002e00680074006d006c00000000}}
}{\fldrslt {http://samvak.tripod.com/culture.html}}}{
\par }\pard\plain \s4\qj \li0\ri0\sb120\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\outlinelevel3\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \b\i\f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {Poetry:
\par }\pard\plain \qj \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f28\fs18\lang2057\langfe1033\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp1033 {\field\flddirty{\*\fldinst { HYPERLINK "http://samvak.tripod.com/contents.html" }{\ul\cf2 
{\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b0200000003000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b4e00000068007400740070003a002f002f00730061006d00760061006b002e0074007200690070006f0064002e0063006f006d002f0063006f006e00740065006e00740073002e00680074006d006c00000000}}
}{\fldrslt {http://samvak.tripod.com/contents.html}}}{
\par \page 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\f0\fs44 Malignant Self Love}{
\par }{\i\f0\fs28 Narcissism Revisited}{
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b The Book}{
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\i\cgrid0 "Narcissists live in a state of constant rage
, repressed aggression, envy and hatred. They firmly believe that everyone is like them. As a result, they are paranoid, suspicious, scared and erratic. Narcissists are forever in pursuit of Narcissistic Supply.}{\i 
\par }{\i\cgrid0 They know no past or future, are not constrained by any behavioural consistency, 'rules' of conduct or moral considerations. You signal to a narcissist that you are a willing source \endash 
 and he is bound to extract his supply from you. This is a reflex.}{\i 
\par }{\i\cgrid0 He would have reacted absolutely the same to any other source. If what is needed to obtain supply from you is intimations of intimacy \endash  he will employ them liberally."}{
\par This book is comprised of two parts.
\par The first part contains 80 Frequently Asked Questions related to the various aspects of pathological narcissism and the Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD).
\par The second part is an exposition of the various psychodynamic theories regarding pathological narcissism and a proposed new vocabulary.
\par 
\par 
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sa60\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\b The Author}{
\par }\pard \qc \li0\ri0\sl264\slmult1\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 {Sam Vaknin was born in Israel in 1961. A financial consultant and columnist, he lived (and published) in 11 countries.
\par He is a published and awarded author of short fiction and reference and an editor of mental health categories in various web directories. This is his}{\lang1033\langfe1033\langnp1033  twelfth}{ book.
\par }}
