The Project Gutenberg EBook of Malignant Self Love, by Sam Vaknin
(#2 in our series by Sam Vaknin)

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Copyright (C) 2003 by Lidija Rangelovska.

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Malignant Self Love

Author: Sam Vaknin

Release Date: November, 2003  [EBook #4663]
[This file was first posted on July 2, 2003]

Edition: 11

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, MALIGNANT SELF LOVE ***




Copyright (C) 2003 by Lidija Rangelovska.



Malignant

Self Love

Narcissism Revisited

1st EDITION

3rd Revised Printing

EXCERPTS

Sam Vaknin, Ph.D.

The Author is NOT a Mental Health Professional.

The Author is certified in Counselling Techniques.

Editing and Design:

Lidija Rangelovska

A Narcissus Publications Imprint

Prague & Skopje 2003

(c) 1999, 2001, 2003 Copyright Lidija Rangelovska

All rights reserved. This book, or any part thereof, may not be used or
reproduced in any manner without written permission from:

Lidija Rangelovska - write to:

palma@unet.com.mk or to

vaknin@link.com.mk

All rights for this book are for sale.

Literary agents and publishers, please contact Lidija Rangelovska.

To get FREE updates of this book JOIN the Narcissism Study List.

To JOIN, visit our Web sites:

http://www.geocities.com/vaksam/narclist.html or

http://samvak.tripod.com/narclist.html or

http://groups.yahoo.com/group/narcissisticabuse

Visit the Author's Web site:

http://samvak.tripod.com

Buy other books about pathological narcissism and relationships with
abusive narcissists here:

http://samvak.tripod.com/thebook.html

ISBN: 9989-929-06-8

Print ISBN: 80-238-3384-7

Created by:

Lidija Rangelovska, Skopje

REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA



C O N T E N T S

Foreword

Introduction - The Habitual Identity

The Narcissistic Personality Disorder

A Primer on Narcissism

Bibliography

Overview

Chapter I:        The Soul of a Narcissist

Chapter II:        Being Special

Chapter III:        Uniqueness and Intimacy

Chapter IV:        The Workings of a Narcissist

Chapter V:        The Tortured Self

Chapter VI:        The Emotional Involvement Preventive Measures

Frequently Asked Questions

Narcissism - The Disorder

FAQ # 1:        An Overview of the Narcissist

FAQ # 2:        Pathological Narcissism - A Dysfunction or a Blessing?

FAQ # 3:        The Energy of Self

FAQ # 4:        Self-Love and Narcissism

FAQ # 5:        Self-Defeating and Self-Destructive Behaviours

FAQ # 6:        Ideas of Reference

FAQ # 7:        Grandiose Fantasies

FAQ # 8:        Grandiosity Hangover and Narcissist Baiting

FAQ # 9:        Depression and the Narcissist

FAQ # 10:        Narcissistic Rage

(Anger as a Source of Personality Disorder)

FAQ # 11:        Gender and the Narcissist

FAQ # 12:        Homosexual Narcissist

FAQ # 13:        Addiction to Fame and Celebrity

FAQ # 14:        Conspicuous Existence

FAQ # 15:        The Narcissist's Reaction to Deficient Narcissistic
Supply

FAQ # 16:        The Delusional Way Out

FAQ # 17:        The Compulsive Acts of the Narcissist

FAQ # 18:        Narcissistic Routines

FAQ # 19:        The Unstable Narcissist

FAQ # 20:        Do Narcissists Have Emotions?

FAQ # 21:        The Inappropriate Affect

FAQ # 22:        The Cynical Narcissist

FAQ # 23:        The Narcissist as a Sadist

FAQ # 24:        Other People's Pain

FAQ # 25:        Multiple Grandiosity

FAQ # 26:        False Modesty

FAQ # 27:        Warped Reality and Retroactive Emotional Content

FAQ # 28:        Narcissistic Signal, Stimulus and Hibernation
Mini-Cycles

FAQ # 29:        The Narcissistic Pendulum and the Pathological
Narcissistic Space

FAQ # 30:        The Inanimate as a Source of Narcissistic Supply

        (Narcissistic Branding and Narcissistic Contagion)

FAQ # 31:        The Dual Role of the False Self

FAQ # 32:        The Stripped Ego

FAQ # 33:        The Split-off Ego

FAQ # 34:        The Serious Narcissist

FAQ # 35:        Narcissists, Disagreements and Criticism

FAQ # 36:        Transformations of Aggression

FAQ # 37:        Narcissistic Humiliation

FAQ # 38:        The Midlife Narcissist

FAQ # 39:        To Age with Grace

FAQ # 40:        The Narcissist and Introspection

FAQ # 41:        The Losses of the Narcissist

FAQ # 42:        Getting Better

FAQ # 43:        Can a Narcissist Help Himself?

FAQ # 44:        Reconditioning the Narcissist

FAQ # 45:        Treatment Modalities and Therapies

FAQ # 46:        Narcissistic Mirroring

FAQ # 47:        The Development of the Narcissist

FAQ # 48:        The Narcissist's Mother

FAQ # 49:        The Inverted Narcissist

FAQ # 50:        Narcissists, Inverted Narcissists and Schizoids

FAQ # 51:        Narcissists and Chemical Imbalances

FAQ # 52:        Myths about Narcissism

FAQ # 53:        The Selfish Gene

(The Genetic Underpinnings of Narcissism)

FAQ # 54:        Narcissism - The Psychopathological Default

FAQ # 55:        Narcissism with Other Mental Health Disorders

(Co-Morbidity and Dual Diagnosis)

FAQ # 56:        Eating Disorders and the Narcissist

FAQ # 57:        Can the Narcissist Have a Meaningful Life?

FAQ # 58:        A Case Study

FAQ # 59:        The Narcissist's Reactions to This Text

Narcissism and Society

FAQ # 60:        A Dream Interpreted

FAQ # 61:        How to Recognise a Narcissist?

FAQ # 62:        Interacting with a Narcissist

FAQ # 63:        The Weapon of Language

FAQ # 64:        Exploitation by a Narcissist

FAQ # 65:        The Narcissist's Victims

FAQ # 66:        Narcissism by Proxy

FAQ # 67:        Narcissists in Positions of Authority

FAQ # 68:        For the Love of God

FAQ # 69:        The Narcissist and Social Institutions

FAQ # 70:        Collective Narcissism (Narcissism, Culture and Society)

FAQ # 71:        The Narcissist in Court

FAQ # 72:        The Narcissist in a Workplace

FAQ # 73:        Responsibility and Other Matters

FAQ # 74:        The Accountable Narcissist

FAQ # 75:        Crime and Punishment: The Never Repenting Narcissist

FAQ # 76:        Narcissists, Group Behaviour and Terrorism

FAQ # 77:        Is the Narcissist Ever Sorry?

FAQ # 78:        A Letter about Trust

FAQ # 79:        The Guilt of Others

FAQ # 80:        Narcissistic Confinement

FAQ # 81:        Narcissistic Allocation

FAQ # 82:        Narcissistic Immunity

FAQ # 83:        Narcissists, Love and Healing

FAQ # 84:        Vindictive Narcissists

FAQ # 85:        Narcissists as Mass and Serial Killers

FAQ # 86:        Narcissists, Narcissistic Supply and Sources of Supply

Narcissists and Family

FAQ # 87:        How to Cope with a Narcissist?

FAQ # 88:        Narcissists and Women

FAQ # 89:        The Spouse/Mate/Partner of the Narcissist

FAQ # 90:        Investing in a Narcissist

FAQ # 91:        The Double Reflection

(Narcissistic Couples and Narcissistic Types)

FAQ # 92:        Narcissistic Parents

FAQ # 93:        Narcissists and Children

FAQ # 94:        The Narcissist and His Family

FAQ # 95:        Narcissists, Sex and Fidelity

FAQ # 96:        The Extra-Marital Narcissist

FAQ # 97:        Mourning the Narcissist

FAQ # 98:         Surviving the Narcissist

FAQ # 99:        The Dead Parents

The Author

Online index

Go here: http://samvak.tripod.com/siteindex.html

F O R E W O R D

Hello. Recognise me? No? Well, you see me all the time. You read my
books, watch me on the big screen, feast on my art, cheer at my games,
use my inventions, vote me into office, follow me into battle, take
notes at my lectures, laugh at my jokes, marvel at my successes, admire
my appearance, listen to my stories, discuss my politics, enjoy my
music, excuse my faults, envy me my blessings. No? Still doesn't ring a
bell? Well, you have seen me. Of that I am positive. In fact, if there
is one thing I am absolutely sure of, it is that. You have seen me.

Perhaps our paths crossed more privately. Perhaps I am the one who came
along and built you up when you were down, employed you when you were
out of a job, showed the way when you were lost, offered confidence
when you were doubting, made you laugh when you were blue, sparked your
interest when you were bored, listened to you and understood, saw you
for what you really are, felt your pain and found the answers, made you
want to be alive. Of course you recognise me. I am your inspiration,
your role model, your saviour, your leader, your best friend, the one
you aspire to emulate, the one whose favour makes you glow.

But I can also be your worst nightmare. First I build you up because
that's what you need. Your skies are blue. Then, out of the blue, I
start tearing you down. You let me do it because that's what you are
used to and you are dumfounded. I was wrong to take pity on you. You
really are incompetent, disrespectful, untrustworthy, immoral,
ignorant, inept, egotistical, constrained, disgusting. You are a social
embarrassment, an unappreciative partner, an inadequate parent, a
disappointment, a sexual flop, a financial liability. I tell you this
to your face. I must. It is my right, because it is. I behave, at home
and away, any way I want to, with total disregard for conventions,
mores, or the feelings of others. It is my right, because it is.

I lie to your face, without a twitch or a twitter, and there is
absolutely nothing you can do about it. In fact, my lies are not lies
at all. They are the truth, my truth. And you believe them, because you
do, because they do not sound or feel like lies, because to do
otherwise would make you question your own sanity, which you have a
tendency to do anyway, because from the very beginning of our
relationship you placed your trust and hopes in me, derived your energy
from me, gave me power over you.

Run to our friends. Go. See what that will get you. Ridicule. I am to
them what I originally was to you. They believe what they see and
that's what they see, and they also see the very mixed up person that
you obviously have become. The more you plead for understanding, the
more convinced they will be that you are crazy, the more isolated you
will feel, and the harder you will try to make things right again, by
accepting my criticisms and by striving to improve yourself. Could it
be that you were wrong about me in the beginning? So wrong as that? Not
an easy pill to swallow, is it? How do you think our friends will react
if you try to cram it down their throats? After all, it really is you
who have thwarted my progress, tainted my reputation, thrown me off
course. There is an escape from the frustrations you cause me and,
fortunately, my reputation provides enough insulation from the outside
world so I can indulge in this escape with impunity. What escape? Those
eruptions of anger you dread and fear, my rages. Ah, it feels so good
to rage. It is the expression of and the confirmation of my power over
you. Lying feels good too, for the same reason, but nothing compares to
the pleasure of exploding for no material reason and venting my anger
like a lunatic, all the time a spectator at my own show and seeing your
helplessness, pain, fear, frustration, and dependence. Go ahead. Tell
our friends about it. See if they can imagine it, let alone believe it.
The more outrageous your account of what happened, the more convinced
they will be that the crazy one is you. And don't expect much more from
your therapist either. Surely it is easier to live my lie and see where
that takes you. You might even acquire some of the behaviour you find
so objectionable in me.

But you know what? This may come as a surprise, but I can also be my
own worst nightmare. I can and I am. You see, at heart my life is
nothing more than illusion-clad confusion. I have no idea why I do what
I do, nor do I care to find out. In fact, the mere notion of asking the
question is so repulsive to me that I employ all of my resources to
repel it.

I reconstruct facts, fabricate illusions, act them out, and thus create
my own reality. It is a precarious state of existence indeed, so I am
careful to include enough demonstrable truth in my illusions to ensure
their credibility. And I am forever testing that credibility against
the reactions of others. Fortunately my real attributes and
accomplishments are in sufficient abundance to fuel my illusions
seemingly forever. And modern society, blessed/cursed modern society,
values most what I do best and thus serves as my accomplice. Even I get
lost in my own illusions, swept away by their magic.

So, not to worry if you still do not recognise me. I don't recognise me
either. In fact, I regard myself as like everyone else, only perhaps a
little better. Put another way, I end up thinking that everyone else is
like me, only not quite as good. After all, that's what the universe is
telling me.

Ah, there's the rub. THE universe or MY universe? As long as the magic
of my illusions works on me too, the distinction is immaterial. Hence
my need for a fan club. And I am constantly taking fan club inventory,
testing the loyalty of present members with challenges of abuse,
writing off defectors with total indifference, and scouting the
landscape for new recruits. Do you see my dilemma? I use people who are
dependent on me to keep my illusions alive. In actuality it is I who am
dependent on them. Even the rage, that orgasmic release of pain and
anger, doesn't work without an audience. On some level I am aware of my
illusions, but to admit that would spoil the magic. And that I couldn't
bear. So I proclaim that what I do is of no consequence and no
different from what others do, and thus I create an illusion about my
creating illusions. So, no, I don't recognise me any better than you
do. I wouldn't dare. I need the magic. For the same reason I also fail
to recognise others who behave as I do. In fact, they sometimes recruit
me into their fan clubs. As long as we feed off of each other, who's
the worse for wear? It only confirms my illusion about my illusions:
that I am no different from most other people, just a bit better.

But I AM different and we both know it. Therein lies the root of my
hostility. I tear you down because in reality I am envious of you
BECAUSE I am different. At that haunting level where I see my illusions
for what they are, the illusion that you too create illusions
collapses, leaving me in a state of despair, confusion, panic,
isolation, and envy. You, and others, accuse me of all sorts of
horrible things.

I am totally baffled, clueless. I have done nothing wrong. The
injustice is too much. It only makes the confusion worse. Or is this
too merely another illusion?

How many others like me are there? More than you might think, and our
numbers are increasing. Take twenty people off the street and you will
find one whose mind ticks so much like mine that you could consider us
clones. Impossible, you say. It is simply not possible for that many
people - highly accomplished, respected, and visible people - to be out
there replacing reality with illusions, each in the same way and for
reasons they know not why. It is simply not possible for so many robots
of havoc and chaos, as I describe them, to function daily midst other
educated, intelligent, and experienced individuals, and pass for
normal. It is simply not possible for such an aberration of human
cognition and behaviour to infiltrate and infect the population in such
numbers, virtually undetected by the radar of mental health
professionals. It is simply not possible for so much visible positive
to contain so much concealed negative. It is simply not possible.

But it is. That is the enlightenment of Narcissism Revisited by Sam
Vaknin. Sam is himself one such clone. What distinguishes him is his
uncharacteristic courage to confront, and his uncanny understanding of,
that which makes us tick, himself included. Not only does Sam dare ask
and then answer the question we clones avoid like the plague, he does
so with relentless, laser-like precision. Read his book. Take your seat
at the double-headed microscope and let Sam guide you through the
dissection. Like a brain surgeon operating on himself, Sam explores and
exposes the alien among us, hoping beyond hope for a respectable tumour
but finding instead each and every cell teaming with the same resistant
virus. The operation is long and tedious, and at times frightening and
hard to believe. Read on. The parts exposed are as they are, despite
what may seem hyperbolic or far-fetched. Their validity might not hit
home until later, when coupled with memories of past events and
experiences.

I am, as I said, my own worst nightmare. True, the world is replete
with my contributions, and I am lots of fun to be around. And true,
most contributions like mine are not the result of troubled souls. But
many more than you might want to believe are. And if by chance you get
caught in my Web, I can make your life a living hell. But remember
this. I am in that Web too. The difference between you and me is that
you can get out.

Ken Heilbrunn, M.D.

Seattle, Washington, USA

I N T R O D U C T I O N

The Habitual Identity

Warning and Disclaimer

The contents of this book are not meant to substitute for professional
help and counselling. The readers are discouraged from using it for
diagnostic or therapeutic ends. The diagnosis and treatment of the
Narcissistic Personality Disorder can only be done by professionals
specifically trained and qualified to do so - which the author is not.
The author is NOT a mental health professional, though he is certified
in Mental Health Counselling Techniques.

In a famous experiment, students were asked to take a lemon home and to
grow used to it. Three days later, they were able to single out "their"
lemon from a pile of rather similar ones. They seemed to have bonded.
Is this the true meaning of love, bonding, coupling? Do we simply get
used to other human beings, pets, or objects?

Habit forming in humans is reflexive. We change ourselves and our
environment in order to attain maximum comfort and well-being. It is
the effort that goes into these adaptive processes that forms a habit.
Habits are intended to prevent us from constant experimentation and
risk taking. The greater our well-being, the better we function and the
longer we survive.

Actually, when we get used to something or to someone - we really get
used to ourselves. In our habits we see our history, all the time and
effort invested. Habits are encapsulated versions of our acts,
intentions, emotions and reactions. They are mirrors reflecting back
that part in us that formed the habit.

Hence, the feeling of comfort: we really feel comfortable with our own
selves when we feel comfortable with our habits.

Because of this, we tend to confuse habits with identity. When asked
WHO they are, most people resort to describing their habits. They
relate to us their work, their loved ones, their pets, their hobbies,
or their material possessions. Yet, all of these do not constitute an
identity. Their removal does not change one's identity. They are habits
and they make the respondent comfortable and relaxed. But they are not
part of his identity in the truest, deepest sense.

Still, it is this simple mechanism of deception that binds people
together. A mother feels that her offspring are part of her identity
because she is so used to them that her well-being depends on their
existence and availability. Thus, any threat to her children is
interpreted by a mother as a threat to her person. Her reaction is,
therefore, strong and enduring and can be recurrently elicited.

The truth, of course, is that children ARE a part of their mother's
identity in a superficial manner. Removing them would make her a
different person, but only in the shallow, phenomenological sense of
the word. Her deep-set, true identity is unlikely to change as a result.

But what is this kernel of identity that I am referring to? This
immutable entity which is the definition of who we are and what we are
and which, ostensibly, is not influenced by the death of our loved
ones? What is so strong as to resist the breaking of habits that
die-hard?

It is our personality. This elusive, loosely interconnected,
interacting, pattern of reactions to our changing environment. Like the
mind, it is difficult to define or to capture. Like the soul, many
believe that it does not exist, that it is a fictitious convention.
Yet, we know that we do have a personality. We feel it, we experience
it. It sometimes encourages us to do things - or prevents us from doing
them. It can be supple or rigid, benign or malignant, open or closed.
Its power lies in its looseness. It is able to combine, recombine and
permutate in hundreds of unforeseeable ways. It metamorphoses and the
constancy of its rate and kind of change is what gives us a sense of
identity.

Actually, when the personality is rigid to the point of being unable to
change in reaction to changing circumstances - we say that it is
disordered. A personality disorder is the ultimate misidentification.

The individual mistakes his habits for his identity. He identifies
himself with his environment, taking behavioural, emotional, and
cognitive cues exclusively from it. His inner world is, so to speak,
vacated, inhabited, as it were, by the apparition of his True Self.

Such a person is incapable of loving and of living. The personality
disordered sees no distinction between his self and his habits. He IS
his habits and, therefore, by definition, can only rarely and with an
incredible amount of exertion, change them. And, in the long-term, he
is incapable of living because life is a struggle TOWARDS, a striving,
a drive AT something. In other words: life is change. He who cannot
change is not really alive.

"Malignant Self-Love - Narcissism Revisited" was written under extreme
conditions of duress. It was composed in jail as I was trying to
understand what had hit me. My nine years old marriage dissolved, my
finances were in a shocking condition, my family estranged, my
reputation ruined, my personal freedom severely curtailed. Slowly, the
realisation that it was all my fault, that I was sick and needed help
penetrated the decades old defences that I erected around me. This book
is the documentation of a road of self-discovery. It was a painful
process, which led to nowhere. I am no different - and no healthier -
today than I was when I wrote this book. My disorder is here to stay,
the prognosis is poor and alarming.

The narcissist is an actor in a monodrama, yet forced to remain behind
the scenes. The scenes take centre stage, instead. The narcissist does
not cater at all to his own needs. Contrary to his reputation, the
narcissist does not "love" himself in any true sense of this loaded
word.

He feeds off other people, who hurl back at him an image that he
projects to them. This is their sole function in his world: to reflect,
to admire, to applaud, to detest - in a word, to assure him that he
exists.

Otherwise, they have no right to tax his time, energy, or emotions - so
he feels.

To borrow Freud's trilateral model, the narcissist's Ego is weak,
disorganised and lacks clear boundaries. Many of the Ego functions are
projected. The Superego is sadistic and punishing. The Id is
unrestrained.

Primary Objects in the narcissist's childhood were badly idealised and
internalised.

His object relations are distraught and destroyed.

The first chapters offer a detailed, first hand account of what it is
like to have a Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD). It offers new
insights and an organised methodological framework using a new
psychodynamic language. It is intended for professionals.

The first part of the book is more accessible. It comprises 99
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) regarding narcissism and personality
disorders. The posting of "Malignant Self-Love - Narcissism Revisited"
on the Web has elicited a flood of excited, sad and heart rending
responses, mostly from victims of narcissists but also from people
suffering from the Narcissistic Personality Disorder. This is a true
picture of the resulting correspondence with them.

This book is heavy reading. It is not intended to please or to
entertain. NPD is a pernicious, vile and tortuous disease, which
affects not only the narcissist. It infects and forever changes people
who are in daily contact with the narcissist. In other words: it is
contagious. It is my contention that narcissism is the mental epidemic
of the twentieth century, a plague to be fought by all means.

This book is my contribution to minimising the damages of this disorder.

Sam Vaknin

Malignant

Self Love

Narcissism Revisited

The Narcissistic Personality Disorder

A Primer on Narcissism

Narcissism (n. sing.)

A pattern of traits and behaviours which signify infatuation and
obsession with one's self to the exclusion of all others and the
egotistic and ruthless pursuit of one's gratification, dominance and
ambition.

Narcissism is named after the ancient Greek myth of Narcissus, a
handsome Greek youth who rejected the desperate advances of the nymph
Echo. In punishment of his cruelty, he was doomed to fall in love with
his own reflection in a pool of water. Unable to consummate his
autoerotic love, he pined away and changed into the flower that bears
his name to this very day.

What is NPD (Narcissistic Personality Disorder)?

The Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD) has been recognised as a
separate mental health disorder in the third edition of the Diagnostic
and Statistics Manual (DSM) in 1980. Its diagnostic criteria and their
interpretation have undergone a major revision in the DSM-III-R [1987]
and were substantially revamped in the DSM-IV-TR in 2000. The European
ICD-10 basically contains identical language.

An all-pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behaviour), need
for admiration or adulation and lack of empathy, usually beginning by
early adulthood and present in various contexts. Five (or more) of the
following criteria must be met:

_        Feels grandiose and self-importance (e.g., exaggerates
achievements and talents to the point of lying, demands to be
recognised as superior without commensurate achievements);

_        Is obsessed with fantasies of unlimited success, fame, fearsome
power or omnipotence, unequalled brilliance (the cerebral narcissist),
bodily beauty or sexual performance (the somatic narcissist), or ideal,
everlasting, all-conquering love or passion;

_        Firmly convinced that he or she is unique and, being special,
can only be understood by, should only be treated by, or associate
with, other special or unique, or high-status people (or institutions);

_        Requires excessive admiration, adulation, attention and
affirmation - or, failing that, wishes to be feared and to be notorious
(Narcissistic Supply);

_        Feels entitled. Expects unreasonable or special and favourable
priority treatment. Demands automatic and full compliance with his or
her expectations;

_        Is "interpersonally exploitative", i.e., uses others to achieve
his or her own ends;

_        Devoid of empathy. Is unable or unwilling to identify with or
acknowledge the feelings and needs of others;

_        Constantly envious of others or believes that they feel the
same about him or her;

_        Arrogant, haughty behaviours or attitudes coupled with rage
when frustrated, contradicted, or confronted.

The language in the criteria above is based on or summarised from:

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-IV-TR, Washington [2000]

Vaknin, Sam. Malignant Self-Love - Narcissism Revisited. Revised ed.
Prague and Skopje, Narcissus Publications [1999, 2001, 2003]

More Data About Pathological Narcissists

_        Most narcissists (75%) are men.

_        NPD (=the Narcissistic Personality Disorder) is one of a
"family" of personality disorders (formerly known as "Cluster B").
Other members: Borderline PD, Antisocial PD and Histrionic PD.

_        NPD is often diagnosed with other mental health disorders
("co-morbidity") - or with substance abuse, or impulsive and reckless
behaviours ("dual diagnosis").

_        NPD is new [1980] mental health category in the Diagnostic and
Statistics Manual (DSM).

_        There is only scant research regarding narcissism. But what
there is has not demonstrated any ethnic, social, cultural, economic,
genetic, or professional predilection to NPD.

_        It is estimated that 0.7-1% of the general population suffer
from NPD.

_        Pathological narcissism was first described in detail by Freud.
Other major contributors are: Klein, Horney, Kohut, Kernberg, Millon,
Roningstam, Gunderson, Hare.

_        The onset of narcissism is in infancy, childhood and early
adolescence. It is commonly attributed to childhood abuse and trauma
inflicted by parents, authority figures, or even peers.

_        There is a whole range of narcissistic reactions - from the
mild, reactive and transient to the permanent personality disorder.

_        Narcissists are either "cerebral" (derive their Narcissistic
Supply from their intelligence or academic achievements) - or "somatic"
(derive their Narcissistic Supply from their physique, exercise,
physical or sexual prowess and "conquests").

_        Narcissists are either "classic" - see definition below - or
they are "compensatory", or "inverted" - see definitions in FAQ 49: The
Inverted Narcissist.

_        NPD is treated by talk therapy (psychodynamic or
cognitive-behavioural). The prognosis for an adult narcissist is poor,
though his adaptation to life and to others can improve with treatment.
Medication is applied to side effects and behaviours (such as mood or
affect disorders and obsession-compulsion) - usually with some success.

Bibliography

1.        Alford, C. Fred. Narcissism: Socrates, the Frankfurt School and
Psychoanalytic Theory. New Haven and London, Yale University Press, 1988

2.        Devereux, George. Basic Problems of Ethno-Psychiatry.
University of Chicago Press, 1980

3.        Fairbairn, W. R. D. An Object Relations Theory of the
Personality. New York, Basic Books, 1954

4.        Freud S. Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality [1905].
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud.
Vol. 7. London, Hogarth Press, 1964

5.        Freud, S. On Narcissism. Standard Ed. Vol. 14, pp. 73-107

6.        Goldman, Howard H. (Ed.). Review of General Psychiatry. 4th Ed.
London, Prentice Hall International, 1995

7.        Golomb, Elan. Trapped in the Mirror: Adult Children of
Narcissists in Their Struggle for Self. Quill, 1995

8.        Greenberg, Jay R. and Mitchell, Stephen A. Object Relations in
Psychoanalytic Theory. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press, 1983

9.        Grunberger, Bela. Narcissism: Psychoanalytic Essays. New York,
International Universities Press, 1979

10.        Guntrip, Harry. Personality Structure and Human Interaction.
New York, International Universities Press, 1961

11.        Horowitz M. J. Sliding Meanings: A Defence against Threat in
Narcissistic Personalities. International Journal of Psychoanalytic
Psychotherapy, 1975; 4:167

12.        Horovitz M. J. Stress Response Syndromes: PTSD, Grief and
Adjustment Disorders. 3rd Ed. New York, NY University Press, 1998

13.        Jacobson, Edith. The Self and the Object World. New York,
International Universities Press, 1964

14.        Jung, C.G. Collected Works. G. Adler, M. Fordham and H. Read
(Eds.). 21 volumes. Princeton University Press, 1960-1983

15.        Kernberg O. Borderline Conditions and Pathological Narcissism.
New York, Jason Aronson, 1975

16.        Klein, Melanie. The Writings of Melanie Klein. Roger
Money-Kyrle (Ed.). 4 Vols. New York, Free Press, 1964-75

17.        Kohut H. The Chicago Institute Lectures 1972-1976. Marian and
Paul Tolpin (Eds.). Analytic Press, 1998

18.        Kohut M. The Analysis of the Self. New York, International
Universities Press, 1971

19.        Lasch, Christopher. The Culture of Narcissism. New York, Warner
Books, 1979

20.        Levine, J. D., and Weiss, Rona H. The Dynamics and Treatment of
Alcoholism. Jason Aronson, 1994

21.        Lowen, Alexander. Narcissism: Denial of the True Self.
Touchstone Books, 1997

22.        Millon, Theodore (and Roger D. Davis, contributor). Disorders
of Personality: DSM-IV and Beyond. 2nd ed. New York, John Wiley and
Sons, 1995

23.        Millon, Theodore. Personality Disorders in Modern Life. New
York, John Wiley and Sons, 2000

24.        Riso, Don Richard. Personality Types: Using the Enneagram for
Self-Discovery. Boston: Houghton Mifflin 1987

25.        Roningstam, Elsa F. (Ed.). Disorders of Narcissism: Diagnostic,
Clinical, and Empirical Implications. American Psychiatric Press, 1998

26.        Rothstein, Arnold. The Narcissistic Pursuit of Reflection. 2nd
revised Ed. New York, International Universities Press, 1984

27.        Schwartz, Lester. Narcissistic Personality Disorders - A
Clinical Discussion. Journal of American Psychoanalytic Association -
22 [1974]: 292-305

28.        Salant-Schwartz, Nathan. Narcissism and Character
Transformation. Inner City Books, 1985 - pp. 90-91

29.        Stern, Daniel. The Interpersonal World of the Infant: A View
from Psychoanalysis and Developmental Psychology. New York, Basic
Books, 1985

30.        Vaknin, Sam. Malignant Self-Love - Narcissism Revisited. Skopje
and Prague, Narcissus Publications, 1999, 2001, 2003

31.        Zweig, Paul. The Heresy of Self-Love: A Study of Subversive
Individualism. New York, Basic Books, 1968

Malignant

Self Love

Narcissism Revisited

Overview

This section contains professional terms.

For treatment of specific issues go to the

Frequently Asked Questions.

CHAPTER I

The Soul of a Narcissist

The State of the Art

We all love ourselves. That seems to be such an instinctively true
statement that we do not bother to examine it more thoroughly. In our
daily lives - in love, in business, in other areas of life - we act on
this premise. Yet, upon closer inspection, it looks shakier.

Some people explicitly state that they do not love themselves at all.
Others confine their lack of self-love to certain traits, to their
personal history, or to some of their behaviour patterns. Yet others
feel content with who they are and with what they are doing.

But one group of people seems distinct in its mental constitution -
narcissists.

According to the legend of Narcissus, this Greek boy fell in love with
his own reflection in a pond. Presumably, this amply sums up the nature
of his namesakes: narcissists. The mythological Narcissus was rejected
by the nymph Echo and was punished by Nemesis, Consigned to pine away
as he fell in love with his own reflection. How apt. Narcissists are
punished by echoes and reflections of their problematic personalities
up to this very day.

They are said to be in love with themselves.

But this is a fallacy. Narcissus is not in love with HIMSELF. He is in
love with his REFLECTION.

There is a major difference between True Self and reflected-self.

Loving your True Self is a healthy, adaptive and functional quality.

Loving a reflection has two major drawbacks. One is the dependence on
the very existence and availability of a reflection to produce the
emotion of self-love.

The other is the absence of a "compass", an "objective and realistic
yardstick", by which to judge the authenticity of the reflection and to
measure its isomorphic attributes. In other words, it is impossible to
tell whether the reflection is true to reality - and, if so, to what
extent.

The popular misconception is that narcissists love themselves. In
reality, they direct their love to second hand impressions of
themselves in the eyes of beholders. He who loves only impressions is
not acquainted with the emotion of loving humans and is, therefore,
incapable of loving them, or himself.

But the narcissist does possess the in-bred desire to love and to be
loved. If he cannot love himself - he has to love his reflection. But
to love his reflection - it must be loveable. Thus, driven by the
insatiable urge to love (which we all possess), the narcissist is
grossly preoccupied with projecting a loveable image of himself unto
others. This image has to be compatible with his self-image (the way he
"sees" himself).

It is maintained through the investment of a reasonable proportion of
the resources and energy of the narcissist. An image, which would take
most of the narcissist's time and energy to preserve, would be highly
ineffective because it would render him vulnerable to external threats.

But the most important characteristic of such an image is its
lovability.

To a narcissist, love is interchangeable with other emotions, such as
awe, respect, admiration, or even mere attention. An image, which
provokes these reactions in others - is both "loveable and loved", as
far as the narcissist is concerned. It satisfies his basic requirement:
that it should give him something to love which would feel like
self-love.

The more successful this image (or series of successive images) - the
more the narcissist becomes divorced from his True Self and married to
the image.

I am not saying that the narcissist does not have this central nucleus
of a "self". All I am saying is that he prefers his image - with which
he identifies himself unreservedly - to his self. A hierarchy is
formed. The self becomes serf to the Image.

This is exactly the opposite of the common notions concerning
narcissists. The narcissist is not selfish - his self is paralysed.

He is not tuned exclusively to his needs. On the contrary: he ignores
them because many of them conflict with his omnipotent and omniscient
image. He does not put himself first - he puts his self last. He caters
to the needs and wishes of everyone around him - because he craves
their love and admiration. It is through their reactions that he
acquires a sense of distinct self. In many ways he annuls himself -
only to re-invent himself through the look of others. He is the person
most insensitive to his true needs.

The narcissist consumes his mental energy incessantly in this process.
He drains himself. This is why he has no energy left to dedicate to
others. This fact as well as his inability to love human beings in
their many dimensions and facets - transform him into a mental recluse.
His soul is fortified and in the solace of this fortification he guards
its territory jealously and fiercely. He protects what he perceives to
constitute his independence.

Why should people indulge the narcissist? And what is the
"evolutionary", survival value of preferring one kind of love (directed
at a symbol, an image) to another (directed at one's self)?

These questions torment the narcissist. His convoluted mind comes up
with the most elaborate contraptions in lieu of answers.

Why should people indulge the narcissist, divert time and energy, give
him attention, love and adulation? The narcissist's answer is simple:
because he is entitled to it. The narcissist has an inflated sense of
entitlement. He feels that he deserves whatever he succeeds to extract
from others and much more. Actually, he feels betrayed, discriminated
against and underprivileged because he always believes that he is not
getting enough, that he should get more than he does. There is a
discrepancy between his infinite certainty that his is a special status
worthy of eternally recurrent praise and adoration, replete with
special benefits and prerogatives - and the actual state of his
affairs. This is the prima causa of the psychodynamics of the
narcissist's mind. To the narcissist, this status of uniqueness is
bestowed upon him not by virtue of his achievements, but merely because
he exists. His mere existence is sufficiently unique to warrant the
kind of treatment that he expects to get from the world. Herein lies a
paradox, which haunts the narcissist: he derives his sense of
uniqueness from the very fact that he exists and he derives his sense
of existence from his belief that he is unique.

Clinical data show that there is rarely any realistic basis for this
notion of greatness and uniqueness.

Narcissists do hold high positions and, at times, are achievers with
proven track records. Some of them are respected members of their
communities, some of them even leaders. Mostly, they are dynamic and
successful. Still, one thing separates them from persons of similar
circumstance: the pomp.

They are ridiculously pompous and inflated personalities, bordering on
the farcical and provoking resentment.

The narcissist is forced to use other people in order to feel that he
exists. It is trough their eyes and through their behaviour that he
obtains proof of his uniqueness and grandeur. He is a habitual
"people-junkie". With time, he comes to regard those around him as mere
instruments for his satisfaction, as two-dimensional cartoon figures
with negligible lines in the script of his magnificent life. He becomes
unscrupulous and suppresses all the discomfort that he might have felt
in the past concerning his conduct. He seems never to be bothered by
the constant use he makes of his milieu. He seems not to mind the
consequences of his acts: the damage and the pain that he inflicts on
others and even the social condemnation and sanctions that he often has
to endure.

When a person persists in a dysfunctional, maladaptive or plain useless
behaviour despite grave repercussions to himself and to his
surroundings - we say that his acts are compulsive.

It would, indeed, be safe to say that the narcissist is compulsive in
his behaviour. This linkage between narcissism and obsessive-compulsive
disorders sheds light on the mechanisms of the narcissistic psyche.

The narcissist does not suffer from a faulty sense of causation. He is
able to accurately predict the outcomes of his actions and he knows
that he might be forced to pay a dear price for his deeds. But he
doesn't care.

A personality whose very existence is a derivative of its reflection in
other people's minds - is perilously dependent on these people's
perceptions. They are the source of its Narcissistic Supply (NS). Every
shred of criticism and disapproval is interpreted as a withholding of
this supply and as a direct threat to the very mental existence of the
narcissist. The narcissist lives in a world of all or nothing, of a
constant "to be or not be". Every discussion that he holds, every
glance of every passer-by reaffirms his existence or casts doubt upon
it. This is why the reactions of the narcissist seem so
disproportionate: he reacts to what he perceives to be threats to the
very cohesion of his self.

Thus, a minor disagreement is transformed in his harried mind into an
ominous sign that he is going to remain devoid of his sources of
self-definition.

This is such a crucial matter, that the narcissist cannot take chances.
He would rather be mistaken - then null and void. He would rather
discern disapproval and unjustified criticism where there is none -
then face the consequences of being caught off-guard.

The narcissist has to condition his human environment to refrain from
expressing criticism and disapproval of him or of his actions and
decisions. He has to teach people around him that these will provoke
him into frightful fits of temper and rage attacks and turn him into a
constantly cantankerous and irascible person. The disproportion of his
reactions constitutes a punishment for their lack of consideration and
their ignorance of his true psychological state. In a curious reversal
of roles - the narcissist blames others for his behaviour, accuses them
of provoking him and believes firmly that "they" should be penalised
accordingly. There is no way to dissuade the narcissist once he has
embarked on one of his temper tantrums. Apologies - unless accompanied
by verbal or other humiliation - are not enough. The fuel of his rage
is spent mainly on vitriolic verbal send-offs directed at the (often
imaginary) perpetrator of the (oft imaginary) offence.

A coherent picture emerges:

The narcissist - wittingly or not - utilises people to buttress his
self-image and self-worth. As long and in as much as they are
instrumental in achieving these goals - he holds them in high regard,
they are valuable to him. He sees them only through this lens. This is
a result of his inability to love humans: he lacks empathy, he thinks
utility, and he reduces others to mere instruments. If they cease to
"function", if - no matter how inadvertently - they cause him to doubt
this illusory, half-baked, self-esteem - they become the subject of a
reign of terror. The narcissist then proceeds to hurt these
"insubordinate wretches". He belittles and humiliates them. He displays
aggression and violence in myriad forms. His behaviour metamorphesises,
kaleidoscopically, from over-valuation of the useful other - to a
severe devaluation of same.

The narcissist abhors, almost physiologically, people judged by him to
be "useless".

These rapid alterations between absolute overvaluation to complete
devaluation of others make the maintenance of long-term interpersonal
relationships all but impossible.

The more pathological form of narcissism - the Narcissistic Personality
Disorder (NPD) - was defined in the successive versions of the American
DSM and the European ICD. It is useful to scrutinise these geological
layers of clinical observations and their interpretation. In 1977 the
DSM-III criteria included [the following texts are adaptations of the
original ones]:

_        An inflated valuation of oneself (exaggeration of talents and
achievements, demonstration of presumptuous self-confidence);

_        Interpersonal exploitation (uses others to satisfy his needs
and desires, expects preferential treatment without undertaking mutual
commitments);

_        Possesses expansive imagination (externalises immature and
non-regimented fantasies, "prevaricates to redeem self-illusions");

_        Displays supercilious imperturbability (except when the
narcissistic confidence is shaken), nonchalant, unimpressed and
cold-blooded;

_        Defective social conscience (rebels against the conventions of
common social existence, does not value personal integrity and the
rights of other people).

Compare the 1977 version with the one adopted 10 years later [in the
DSM-III-R] and expanded upon in 1994 [in the DSM-IV] and in 2000 [the
DSM-IV-TR]:

An all-pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or in behaviour), a
need for admiration and a marked lack of empathy which starts at early
adulthood and is present in a variety of contexts.

At least 5 of the following should be present for a person to be
diagnosed as suffering from Narcissistic Personality Disorder:

_        Possesses a grandiose sense of self-importance (for example:
exaggerates his achievements and his talents, expects his superiority
to be recognised without having the commensurate skills or
achievements);

_        Pre-occupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power,
brilliance and beauty or of ideal love;

_        Believes that he is unique and special and that only high
status and special people (or institutions) could understand him (or
that it is only with such people and institutions that it is worth his
while to be associated with);

_        Demands excessive and exceptional admiration;

_        Feels that he is deserving of exceptionally good treatment,
automatic obeisance of his (usually unrealistic) expectations;

_        Exploitative in his interpersonal relationships, uses others to
achieve his goals;

_        Lacks empathy: is disinterested in other people's needs and
emotions and does not identify with them;

_        Envies others or believes that others envy him;

_        Displays arrogance and haughtiness.

There emerges a portrait of a monster, a ruthless and exploitative
person. But this is only the phenomenological side. Inside, the
narcissist suffers from a chronic lack of confidence and is
fundamentally dissatisfied.

On the outside, his is a vicissitudinal nature. This is far from
reflecting the barren landscape of misery and fears that constitutes
his soul. His tumultuous behaviour covers up for a submissive,
depressed interior.

How can such contrasts coexist?

Freud [1915] offered a trilateral model of the human psyche, composed
of the Id, the Ego and the Superego.

According to Freud, the narcissists are dominated by their Ego to such
an extent that the Id and Superego are neutralised. Early in his
career, Freud believed narcissism to be a normal developmental phase
between autoeroticism and object-love. Later on, he concluded that the
development cycle can be thwarted by the very efforts we all make in
our infancy to develop the capacity to love an object. Some of us, thus
Freud, fail to grow beyond the phase of self-love in the development of
the libido. Others refer to themselves and prefer themselves as THE
objects of love (instead of their mothers).

This choice - to concentrate on the self - is the result of an
unconscious decision to give up an unrewarding effort to love others
and to trust them.

The child learns that the only one he can trust to always and reliably
be available - is he. Therefore, the only one he can love without being
abandoned or hurt - is again he. Meaningful others were inconsistent in
their acceptance of the child and the only times they paid attention to
him were when they wished to satisfy their needs. They tended to ignore
him when these needs were no longer pressing or existent. So, the child
learned to side-step deeper relationships in order to avoid this
approach-avoidance pendulum. Protecting himself from hurt and from
abandonment, he would rather not have anything to do with people around
him. He digs in - rather than spring out.

As children, all of us go through this phase of disbelief. We all put
people around us (=the objects) to a test. This is the "primary
narcissistic stage". A positive relationship with one's parents or
caregivers (=Primary Objects) secures the smooth transition to "object
love". The child forgoes his narcissism. This is tough: narcissism is
alluring. It is very soothing, warm and dependable. It never lets one
down. It is always present and omnipresent. It is custom tailored to
the needs of the individual. To love oneself is to have the perfect
lover. Good reasons and strong forces are required to motivate the
child to give it up - "parental love". The child progresses in order to
be able to love his parents. If they are narcissists - they go through
the idealisation (over-valuation) and devaluation cycle. They do not
reliably satisfy the ever-present needs of the "child". In other words,
they frustrate him. He gradually develops the sensation that he is no
more than a toy, a tool to provide his parents with satisfaction, means
to an end. This deforms the budding Ego. The "child" forms a strong
dependence (as opposed to attachment) on his parents. This dependence
is really a reflection of fear, the mirror image of aggression, as we
shall see later. In Freud-speak (psychoanalysis) we say that the child
is likely to develop accentuated oral fixations and regressions. In
plain terms, we are likely to see a lost, phobic, helpless, raging
child.

But a child is still a child and his relationship with his parents is
of ultimate importance to him.

He, therefore, fights himself and tries to defuse his libidinal and
aggressive sensations and emotions. This way, he hopes to rehabilitate
the damaged relationship (which never really existed - hence the
primordial confabulation, the mother of all future fantasies). In his
embattled mind, he transforms the Superego into an idealised, sadistic
parent-child. His Ego becomes the complementing part in this imaginary
play of invented roles: a hated, devalued child-parent.

The family is the mainspring of support of every kind. It mobilises
psychological resources and alleviates emotional burdens. It allows for
the sharing of tasks, provides material supplies coupled with cognitive
training. It is the prime socialisation agent and encourages the
absorption of information, most of it useful and adaptive.

This division of labour between parents and children is vital both to
development and to proper adaptation. The child must feel, in a
functional family, that he can share his experiences without being
defensive and that the feedback that he is likely to get will be open
and unbiased. The only "bias" acceptable (often because it is
consistent with constant outside feedback) is the set of beliefs,
values and goals that are finally internalised by the child by way of
imitation and unconscious identification. So, the family is the first
and the most important source of identity and emotional support. It is
a greenhouse where a child feels loved, accepted and secure - the
prerequisites for the development of personal resources. On the
material level, the family should provide the basic necessities (and,
preferably, beyond), physical care and protection and refuge and
shelter during crises.

The role of the mother (the Primary Object) has been often discussed
and dissected. The father's part is mostly neglected, even in
professional literature. However, recent research demonstrates his
importance to the orderly and healthy development of the child.

The father participates in the day-to-day care, is an intellectual
catalyst, who encourages the child to develop his interests and to
satisfy his curiosity through the manipulation of various instruments
and games. He is a source of authority and discipline, a boundary
setter, enforcing and encouraging positive behaviours and eliminating
negative ones. He also provides emotional support and economic
security, thus stabilising the family unit. Finally, he is the prime
source of masculine orientation and identification to the male child -
and gives warmth and love as a male to his daughter, without exceeding
the socially permissible limits.

We can safely say that the narcissist's family is as severely
disordered as he is. He is largely a reflection of its dysfunction. One
or more (usually, many more) of the functions aforementioned are
improperly fulfilled.

The two most important mechanisms are:

First, the mechanism of self-deception. The narcissist's internal
dialogue is "I do have a relationship with my parents. It is my fault -
the fault of my emotions, sensations, aggressions and passions - that
this relationship is not working. It is, therefore, my responsibility
to make amends. I will construct a narrative in which I am both loved
and punished. In this script, I will allocate roles to myself and to my
parents. This way, everything will be fine and we will all be happy."

Second is the mechanism of over-valuation (idealisation) and
devaluation. The dual roles of sadist and punished masochist (Superego
and Ego), parent and child permeate, all the of the narcissist's
interactions with other people.

The narcissist experiences a reversal of roles as his relationships
progress.

At the beginning of every relationship he is the child in need of
attention, approval and admiration. He becomes dependent.

Then, at the first sign of disapproval (real or imaginary), he becomes
an avowed sadist, punishing and inflicting pain.

Otto Kernberg [1975, 1984, 1987] is a senior member of the object
relations school in psychology [Kohut, Kernberg, Klein, Winnicott].

Kernberg disagrees with Freud. He regards the division between an
"object libido" (=energy directed at objects, people in the immediate
vicinity of the infant and who are meaningful to him) and a
"narcissistic libido" (=energy directed at the self as the most
immediate and satisfying object), which precedes it - as artificial.

Whether a "child" develops normal or pathological narcissism depends on
the relations between the representations of the self (=roughly, the
image of the self that the child forms in his mind) and the
representations of objects (=roughly, the images of the objects that
the child in his mind, based on all the information available to him,
including emotional data). It is also dependent on the relationship
between the representations of the self and real, external, "objective"
objects. Add to this instinctual conflicts related both to the libido
and to aggression (these very strong emotions give rise to strong
conflicts in the child) and a comprehensive explanation concerning the
formation of pathological narcissism emerges.

Kernberg's concept of Self is closely related to Freud's concept of
Ego. The self is dependent upon the unconscious, which exerts a
constant influence on all mental functions. Pathological narcissism,
therefore, reflects a libidinal investment in a pathologically
structured self and not in a normal, integrative structure of the self.
The narcissist suffers from a self, which is devalued or fixated on
aggression.

All object relations of such a self are distorted: it detaches from the
real objects (because they hurt him often), dissociates, represses, or
projects. Narcissism is not merely a fixation on an early developmental
stage. It is not confined to the failure to develop intra-psychic
structures.

It is an active, libidinal investment in a deformed structure of the
self.

Kohut, as we said, regarded narcissism as the final product of the
failing efforts of parents to cope with the needs of the child to
idealise and to be grandiose (for instance, to be omnipotent).

Idealisation is an important developmental path leading to narcissism.
The child merges the idealised aspects of the images of the parent
[Imago in Kohut's terminology] with those wide segments of the image of
the parent which are cathected (infused) with object libido (=in which
the child invests the energy that he reserves for objects). This exerts
an enormous and all-important influence on the re-internalisation
processes (=the processes in which the child re-introduced the objects
and their images into his mind) which are right for each of the
successive phases. Through these processes, two permanent nuclei of the
personality are constructed:

a.        The basic, neutralising texture of the psyche, and

b.        The ideal Superego

Both of them are characterised by an invested instinctual narcissistic
cathexis (=invested energy of self-love which is instinctual).

At first, the child idealises his parents. As he grows, he begins to
notice their shortcomings and vices. He withdraws part of the
idealising libido from the images of the parents, which is conducive to
the natural development of the Superego. The narcissistic part of the
child's psyche remains vulnerable throughout its development. This is
largely true until the "child" re-internalises the ideal parent image.

Also, the very construction of the mental apparatus can be tampered
with by traumatic deficiencies and by object losses right through the
Oedipal period (and even in latency and in adolescence).

The same effect can be attributed to traumatic disappointment by
objects.

Disturbances leading to the formation of NPD can be thus grouped into:

1.        Very early disturbances in the relationship with an ideal
object. These lead to a structural weakness of the personality, which
develops a deficient and/or dysfunctional stimuli-filtering mechanism.
The ability of the individual to maintain a basic narcissistic
homeostasis of the personality is damaged.

Such a person suffers from diffusive narcissistic vulnerability.

2.        A disturbance occurring later in life - but still pre-Oedipally
- affects the pre-Oedipal formation of the basic fabric of the control,
channelling and neutralising of drives and urges. The nature of the
disturbance has to be a traumatic encounter with the ideal object (such
as a major disappointment). The symptomatic manifestation of this
structural defect is the propensity to re - sexualise drive derivatives
and internal and external conflicts either in the form of fantasies or
in the form of deviant acts.

3.        A disturbance formed in the Oedipal or even in the early latent
phases - inhibits the completion of the Superego idealisation. This is
especially true of a disappointment related to an ideal object of the
late pre-Oedipal and the Oedipal stages, where the partly idealised
external parallel of the newly internalised object is traumatically
destroyed.

Such a person possesses a set of values and standards - but he forever
looks for ideal external figures from whom he aspires to derive the
affirmation and the leadership that his insufficiently idealised
Superego cannot supply.

It is commonly agreed that a loss (real or perceived) at a critical
junction in the psychological development of the child - forces him to
refer to himself for nurturing and for gratification. The child ceases
to trust others and his ability to develop object love or to idealise
is hampered. He is constantly shadowed by the feeling that only he can
satisfy his emotional needs.

He exploits people, sometimes unintentionally, but always ruthlessly
and mercilessly. He uses them to obtain confirmation of the accuracy of
his grandiose self-portrait.

The narcissist is usually above treatment. He knows best. His
superiority extends to his therapist in particular and to psychology in
general. He seeks treatment only following a major crisis, which
directly threatens his projected and perceived image. We can say that
the narcissist's "pride" has to be severely hurt to motivate him to
admit his need for help. Even then, the therapy sessions resemble a
battleground.

The narcissist is aloof and distanced, demonstrates his superiority in
a myriad of ways, resents what he perceives to be an intrusion on his
innermost sanctum. He is offended by any hint regarding defects or
dysfunctions in his personality or in his behaviour. A narcissist is a
narcissist is a narcissist - even when he asks for help with his world
and worldview shattered.

Malignant

Self Love

Narcissism Revisited

Frequently Asked Questions

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 2

Pathological Narcissism

A Dysfunction or a Blessing?

Comments on recent research by Roy Baumeister.

Is pathological narcissism a blessing or a malediction?

The answer is: it depends. Healthy narcissism is a mature, balanced
love of oneself coupled with a stable sense of self-worth and
self-esteem. Healthy narcissism implies knowledge of one's boundaries
and a proportionate and realistic appraisal of one's achievements and
traits. Pathological narcissism is wrongly described as too much
healthy narcissism (or too much self-esteem). These are two absolutely
unrelated phenomena which, regrettably, came to bear the same title.
Confusing pathological narcissism with self-esteem betrays a
fundamental ignorance of both.

Pathological narcissism involves an impaired, dysfunctional, immature
(True) Self coupled with a compensatory fiction (the False Self). The
sick narcissist's sense of self-worth and self-esteem derive entirely
from audience feedback. The narcissist has no self-esteem or self-worth
of his own (no such Ego functions). In the absence of observers, the
narcissist shrivels to non-existence and feels dead. Hence the
narcissist's preying habits in his constant pursuit of Narcissistic
Supply. Pathological narcissism is an addictive behaviour.

Still, dysfunctions are reactions to abnormal environments and
situations (e.g., abuse, trauma, smothering, etc.).

Paradoxically, his dysfunction allows the narcissist to function. It
compensates for lacks and deficiencies by exaggerating tendencies and
traits. It is like the tactile sense of a blind person. In short:
pathological narcissism is a result of over-sensitivity, the repression
of overwhelming memories and experiences, and the suppression of
inordinately strong negative feelings (e.g., hurt, envy, anger, or
humiliation).

That the narcissist functions at all - is because of his pathology and
thanks to it. The alternative is complete decompensation and
integration.

In time, the narcissist learns how to leverage his pathology, how to
use it to his advantage, how to deploy it in order to maximize benefits
and utilities - in other words, how to transform his curse into a
blessing.

Narcissists are obsessed by delusions of fantastic grandeur and
superiority. As a result they are very competitive. They are strongly
compelled - where others are merely motivated. They are driven,
relentless, tireless, and ruthless. They often make it to the top. But
even when they do not - they strive and fight and learn and climb and
create and think and devise and design and conspire. Faced with a
challenge - they are likely to do better than non-narcissists.

Yet, we often find that narcissists abandon their efforts in
mid-stream, give up, vanish, lose interest, devalue former pursuits, or
slump. Why is that?

A challenge, or even a guaranteed eventual triumph - are meaningless in
the absence of onlookers. The narcissist needs an audience to applaud,
affirm, recoil, approve, admire, adore, fear, or even detest him. He
craves the attention and depends on the Narcissistic Supply only others
can provide. The narcissist derives sustenance only from the outside -
his emotional innards are hollow and moribund.

The narcissist's enhanced performance is predicated on the existence of
a challenge (real or imaginary) and of an audience. Baumeister usefully
re-affirmed this linkage, known to theoreticians since Freud.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 15

The Narcissist's Reaction to Deficient

Narcissistic Supply

Question: How does the narcissist react when not in receipt of
sufficient Narcissistic Supply?

Answer: Very much as a drug addict would react to the absence of his
particular drug. The narcissist constantly consumes (really, preys
upon) adoration, admiration, approval, applause, attention and other
forms of Narcissistic Supply. When lacking or deficient, a Narcissistic
Deficiency Dysphoria sets in. The narcissist looks depressed, his
movements slow down, his sleep patterns are disturbed (he either sleeps
too much or becomes insomniac), his eating patterns change (he gorges
on food or is unable even to look at it). He is be constantly dysphoric
(sad), anhedonic (finds no interest in the world, no pleasure in
anything or in any of his former pursuits and interests). He is
subjected to violent mood swings (mainly rage attacks) and all his
(visible and painful) efforts at self-control fail. He may compulsively
and ritually resort to an alternative addiction - alcohol, drugs,
reading. This constitutes a futile effort of the narcissist both to
escape his predicament - and to sublimate his aggressive urges. His
whole behaviour seems constrained, artificial, full of effort and toil.
The narcissist gradually turns more and more mechanical, detached,
unreal. His thoughts constantly wander or become obsessive and
repetitive, his speech may falter, he appears to be far away, in a
world of his narcissistic fantasies, where Narcissistic Supply is
aplenty. He withdraws from this painful world which knows not how to
appreciate his greatness, special skills and talents, potential, or
achievements. The narcissist thus ceases to bestow himself upon a cruel
universe, punishing it for its shortcomings, its inability to realise
how unique the narcissist is. A schizoid mode sets in: the narcissist
isolates himself, a hermit in the kingdom of his hurt.

He minimises his social interactions and uses "messengers" to
communicate with the outside. Devoid of energy, the narcissist can no
longer pretend or succumb to social conventions. His former compliance
gives way to open withdrawal (a rebellion of sorts). His former smiles
are transformed to frowns, courtesy becomes rudeness, emphasised
etiquette used as a weapon, an outlet of aggression, an act of violence.

The narcissist, blinded by pain, seeks to restore his balance, to take
another sip of the narcissistic nectar. In his quest, the narcissist
turns to and upon those nearest to him. His real attitude emerges: for
him, they are but tools, one-dimensional instruments on the path to
gratification, Sources of Supply or pimps of such supply, catering to
his narcissistic lusts. He regards them as shallow, no longer
functioning objects. In his wrath, he tries to mend them by forcing
them to perform again, to function. This is coupled with horrendous and
torrential self-flagellation, a deservedly self-inflicted punishment,
or so the narcissist feels. In extreme cases of deprivation, the
narcissist may entertain suicidal thoughts, this is how deeply he
loathes his self and his condition.

Through all this, the narcissist is beset by a pervading sense of
nostalgia. It is a malignant variety, harking back to a past, which
never existed except in the thwarted grandiosity of the narcissist. The
longer the lack of Narcissistic Supply, the more this past is
glorified, re-written, missed and mourned. This serves to enhance all
the other negative feelings. Put together, it already amounts to what
might be clinically described as depression. The narcissist then glides
into the shores of paranoia. From his mental closet, he draws a model
of a prosecuting world, incorporating in it those around him and events
in his recent life. This gives meaning to what is erroneously perceived
by the narcissist as a sudden shift from over supply to under or to no
supply (such over and under valuations are typical of him). The
apparent diminishing of the Narcissistic Supply is best explained by a
theory of conspiracy. The narcissist then - in pain, in despair, in
fear - embarks upon an orgy of self-destruction intended to generate
"alternative Supply Sources" (attention) at any cost. The narcissist is
poised to commit the ultimate narcissistic act: self-destruction in the
service of self-aggrandisement.

When deprived of Narcissistic Supply - primary AND secondary - the
narcissist feels annulled. It feels much like being hollowed out,
mentally disembowelled or watching oneself die. It is evaporation,
disintegration into molecules of terrified anguish, helplessly and
inexorably.

Without Narcissistic Supply - the narcissist crumbles, like the zombies
or the vampires one sees in horror movies. It is terrifying and the
narcissist will do anything to avoid it. Think about the narcissist as
a drug addict. His withdrawal symptoms are identical: delusions,
physiological effects, irritability, emotional lability.

Narcissists often experience brief, decompensatory psychotic episodes
when their psyche is disassembled - either deliberately in therapy or
following a life-crisis accompanied by a major narcissistic injury.

These psychotic episodes may be closely allied to another feature of
narcissism: magical thinking. Narcissists are like children in this
sense. Many, for instance, fully believe in two things: that whatever
happens - they will prevail and that good things will always happen to
them. It is more than a belief, really. Narcissists just KNOW it, the
same way one knows gravity - directly, immediately and surely.

The narcissist believes that, no matter what he does, he will always be
forgiven, always prevail and triumph, always come on top. The
narcissist is, therefore, fearless in a manner perceived by others to
be both admirable and insane. He attributes to himself divine and
cosmic immunity - he cloaks myself in it, it renders him invisible to
his enemies and to the powers of "evil". It is a childish
phantasmagoria - but to the narcissist it is very real.

The narcissist knows with religious certainty that good things will
happen to him. With equal certitude, the more self-aware of them know
that they will squander their good fortune time and again in a
bedevilled effort to defeat themselves.

So, no matter what serendipity, what lucky circumstance, what blessing
the narcissist receives - he always strives with blind fury to deflect
them, to deform and to ruin.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 16

The Delusional Way Out

Question: When my husband goes through a bad spot, he shuts himself in
his den all day long, doesn't talk to anyone, just surfs the Web. Is
this typical? Should I be worried?

Answer: The study of narcissism is a century old and the two scholarly
debates central to its conception are still undecided. Is there such a
thing as HEALTHY adult narcissism (Kohut) - or are all the
manifestations of narcissism in adulthood pathological (Freud,
Kernberg)? Moreover, is pathological narcissism the outcome of verbal,
sexual, physical, or psychological abuse (the overwhelming view) - or,
on the contrary, the sad result of spoiling the child and idolizing it
(Millon, the late Freud)?

The second debate is easier to resolve if one agrees to adopt a more
comprehensive definition of "abuse". Overweening, smothering, spoiling,
overvaluing, and idolizing the child - are all forms of parental abuse.

This is because, as Horney pointed out, the child is dehumanized and
instrumentalized. His parents love him not for what he really is - but
for what they wish and imagine him to be: the fulfilment of their
dreams and frustrated wishes. The child becomes the vessel of his
parents' discontented lives, a tool, the magic brush with which they
can transform their failures into successes, their humiliation into
victory, their frustrations into happiness. The child is taught to
ignore reality and to occupy the parental fantastic space. Such an
unfortunate child feels omnipotent and omniscient, perfect and
brilliant, worthy of adoration and entitled to special treatment.

The faculties that are honed by constantly brushing against bruising
reality - empathy, compassion, a realistic assessment of one's
abilities and limitations, realistic expectations of oneself and of
others, personal boundaries, team work, social skills, perseverance and
goal-orientation, not to mention the ability to postpone gratification
and to work hard to achieve it - are all lacking or missing altogether.
The child turned adult sees no reason to invest in his skills and
education, convinced that his inherent genius should suffice. He feels
entitled for merely being, rather than for actually doing (rather as
the nobility in days gone by felt entitled not by virtue of its merit
but as the inevitable, foreordained outcome of its birth right). In
other words, he is not meritocratic - but aristocratic. In short: a
narcissist is born.

But such a mental structure is brittle, susceptible to criticism and
disagreement, vulnerable to the incessant encounter with a harsh and
intolerant world. Deep inside, narcissists of both kinds (those wrought
by "classic" abuse and those yielded by being idolized) - feel
inadequate, phoney, fake, inferior, and deserving of punishment. This
is Millon's mistake. He makes a distinction between several types of
narcissists. He wrongly assumes that the "classic" narcissist is the
outcome of overvaluation, idolization, and spoiling and, thus, is
possessed of supreme, unchallenged, self-confidence, and is devoid of
all self-doubt. According to Millon, it is the "compensatory"
narcissist that falls prey to nagging self-doubts, feelings of
inferiority, and a masochistic desire for self-punishment. Yet, the
distinction is both wrong and unnecessary. There is only ONE type of
narcissist - though there are TWO developmental paths to it. And ALL
narcissists are besieged by deeply ingrained (though at times not
conscious) feelings of inadequacy, fears of failure, masochistic
desires to be penalized, a fluctuating sense of self-worth (regulated
by Narcissistic Supply), and an overwhelming sensation of fakeness.

The Grandiosity Gap (between a fantastically grandiose - and unlimited
- self-image and actual - limited - accomplishments and achievements)
is grating. Its recurrence threatens the precariously balanced house of
cards that is the narcissistic personality. The narcissist finds, to
his chagrin, that people out there are much less admiring,
accommodating and accepting than his parents. As he grows old, the
narcissist often becomes the target of constant derision and mockery, a
sorry sight indeed. His claims for superiority appear less plausible
and substantial the more and the longer he makes them.

The narcissist then resorts to self-delusion. Unable to completely
ignore contrarian opinion and data - he transmutes them. Unable to face
the dismal failure that he is, the narcissist partially withdraws from
reality. To soothe and salve the pain of disillusionment, he
administers to his aching soul a mixture of lies, distortions,
half-truths and outlandish interpretations of events around him. These
solutions can be classified thus:

The Delusional Narrative Solutions

The narcissist constructs a narrative in which he figures as the hero -
brilliant, perfect, irresistibly handsome, destined for great things,
entitled, powerful, wealthy, the centre of attention, etc. The bigger
the strain on this delusional charade - the greater the gap between
fantasy and reality - the more the delusion coalesces and solidifies.

Finally, if it is sufficiently protracted, it replaces reality and the
narcissist's reality test deteriorates. He withdraws his bridges and
may become Schizotypal, catatonic, or schizoid.

The Reality Renouncing Solutions

The narcissist renounces reality. To his mind, those who
pusillanimously fail to recognize his unbound talents, innate
superiority, overarching brilliance, benevolent nature, entitlement,
cosmically important mission, perfection, etc. - do not deserve
consideration. The narcissist's natural affinity with the criminal -
his lack of empathy and compassion, his deficient social skills, his
disregard for social laws and morals - now erupts and blossoms. He
becomes a full fledged antisocial (sociopath or psychopath). He ignores
the wishes and needs of others, he breaks the law, he violates all
rights - natural and legal, he hold people in contempt and disdain, he
derides society and its codes, he punishes the ignorant ingrates -
that, to his mind, drove him to this state - by acting criminally and
by jeopardising their safety, lives, or property.

The Paranoid Schizoid Solution

The narcissist develops persecutory delusions. He perceives slights and
insults where none were intended. He becomes subject to ideas of
reference (people are gossiping about him, mocking him, prying into his
affairs, cracking his e-mail, etc.). He is convinced that he is the
centre of malign and mal-intentioned attention.

People are conspiring to humiliate him, punish him, abscond with his
property, delude him, impoverish him, confine him physically or
intellectually, censor him, impose on his time, force him to action (or
to inaction), frighten him, coerce him, surround and besiege him,
change his mind, part with his values, even murder him, and so on.

Some narcissists withdraw completely from a world populated with such
minacious and ominous objects (really projections of internal objects
and processes). They avoid all social contact, except the most
necessary. They refrain from meeting people, falling in love, having
sex, talking to others, or even corresponding with them. In short: they
become schizoids - not out of social shyness, but out of what they feel
to be their choice. "The world does not deserve me" - goes the inner
refrain - "and I shall waste none of my time and resources on it".

The Paranoid Aggressive (Explosive) Solution

Other narcissists who develop persecutory delusions, resort to an
aggressive stance, a more violent resolution of their internal
conflict. They become verbally, psychologically, situationally (and,
very rarely, physically) abusive. They insult, castigate, chastise,
berate, demean, and deride their nearest and dearest (often well
wishers and loved ones). They explode in unprovoked displays of
indignation, righteousness, condemnation, and blame. Theirs is an
exegetic Bedlam. They interpret everything - even the most innocuous,
inadvertent, and innocent - as designed to provoke and humiliate them.
They sow fear, revulsion, hate, and malignant envy. They flail against
the windmills of reality - a pathetic, forlorn, sight. But often they
cause real and lasting damage - fortunately, mainly to themselves.

Grandiosity and Intimacy - The Roots of Paranoia

Paranoid ideation - the narcissist's deep-rooted conviction that he is
being persecuted by his inferiors, detractors, or powerful ill-wishers
- serves two psychodynamic purposes. It upholds the narcissist's
grandiosity and it fends off intimacy.

Grandiosity Enhancing Paranoia

Being the target of relentless, ubiquitous, and unjust persecution
proves to the paranoid narcissist how important and feared he is. Being
hounded by the mighty and the privileged validates his pivotal role in
the scheme of things.

Only vital, weighty, crucial, essential principals are thus bullied and
intimidated, followed and harassed, stalked and intruded upon - goes
his unconscious inner dialog. The narcissist consistently baits
authority figures into punishing him and thus into upholding his
delusional self-image as worthy of their attention. This provocative
behaviour is called "projective identification". The paranoid delusions
of the narcissist are always grandiose, "cosmic", or "historical". His
pursuers are influential and formidable. They are after his unique
possessions, out to exploit his expertise and special traits, or to
force him to abstain and refrain from certain actions. The narcissist
feels that he is at the centre of intrigues and conspiracies of
colossal magnitudes.

Alternatively, the narcissist feels victimised by mediocre bureaucrats
and intellectual dwarves who consistently fail to appreciate his
outstanding - really, unparalleled - talents, skills, and
accomplishments. Being haunted by his challenged inferiors
substantiates the narcissist's comparative superiority. Driven by
pathological envy, these pygmies collude to defraud him, badger him,
deny him his due, denigrate, isolate, and ignore him.

The narcissist projects onto this second class of lesser persecutors
his own deleterious emotions and transformed aggression: hatred, rage,
and seething jealousy.

The narcissist's paranoid streak is likeliest to erupt when he lacks
Narcissistic Supply. The regulation of his labile sense of self-worth
is dependent upon external stimuli - adoration, adulation, affirmation,
applause, notoriety, fame, infamy, and, in general, attention of any
kind.

When such attention is deficient, the narcissist compensates by
confabulating. He constructs ungrounded narratives in which he is the
protagonist and uses them to force his human environment into
complicity.

Put simply, he provokes people to pay attention to him by misbehaving
or behaving oddly.

Intimacy Retarding Paranoia

Paranoia is use by the narcissist to ward off or reverse intimacy. The
narcissist is threatened by intimacy because it reduces him to
ordinariness by exposing his weaknesses and shortcomings and by causing
him to act "normally". The narcissist also dreads the encounter with
his deep buried emotions - hurt, envy, anger, aggression - likely to be
foisted on him in an intimate relationship.

The paranoid narrative legitimises intimacy repelling behaviours such
as keeping one's distance, secrecy, aloofness, reclusion, aggression,
intrusion on privacy, lying, desultoriness, itinerancy,
unpredictability, and idiosyncratic or eccentric reactions. Gradually,
the narcissist succeeds to alienate and wear down all his friends,
colleagues, well-wishers, and mates.

Even his closest, nearest, and dearest, his family - feel emotionally
detached and "burnt out".

The paranoid narcissist ends life as an oddball recluse - derided,
feared, and loathed in equal measures. His paranoia - exacerbated by
repeated rejections and ageing - pervades his entire life and
diminishes his creativity, adaptability, and functioning. The
narcissist personality, buffeted by paranoia, turns ossified and
brittle. Finally, atomised and useless, it succumbs and gives way to a
great void. The narcissist is consumed.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 19

The Unstable Narcissist

Question: Is the narcissist characterised by instabilities in all the
important aspects of his life at the same time?

Answer: A narcissist is a person who derives his Ego (and Ego
functions) from the reactions of his human environment to a projected,
invented image called the False Self. Since no absolute control over
such feedback of Narcissistic Supply is possible - it is bound to be
volatile - the narcissist's view of himself and of his surroundings is
correspondingly and equally volatile. As "public opinion" fluctuates,
so do his self-confidence, self-esteem, generally, so does his self.
Even his convictions are subject to a never-ending voting process by
others.

The narcissistic personality is subject to instabilities in each and
every one of its dimensions. It is the ultimate hybrid: rigidly
amorphous, devoutly flexible, reliant for its sustenance on the opinion
of people, whom the narcissist undervalues. A large part of this
instability is subsumed under the Emotional Involvement Prevention
Measures (EIPM) that I describe in the Overview. Instability is so
ubiquitous, so all-pervasive, and so prevalent and dominant - that it
might well be described as the ONLY stable feature of the narcissist's
personality.

The narcissist does everything with one goal in mind: to attract
Narcissistic Supply (attention).

An example of this kind of behaviour:

The narcissist may study a given subject diligently and in great depth
in order to impress people later with this newly acquired erudition.
But, having served its purpose, the narcissist lets the knowledge thus
acquired evaporate.

The narcissist maintains a sort of a "short-term" cell or warehouse
where he stores whatever may come handy in the pursuit of Narcissistic
Supply. But he is almost never really interested in what he does,
studies, and experiences. From the outside, this might be perceived as
instability. But think about it this way: the narcissist is constantly
preparing for life's "exams" and feels that he is on a permanent trial.
To forget material studied only in preparation for an examination or
for a court appearance is normal. Short memory storage is a perfectly
common behaviour. What sets the narcissist apart from others is the
fact that for him this is a CONSTANT state of affairs and that it
affects ALL his functions, not only those directly related to learning,
or to emotions, or to experience, or to any single dimension of his
life. Thus, the narcissist learns, remembers and forgets not in line
with his real interests or hobbies, he loves and hates not the real
subjects of his emotions but one dimensional, utilitarian, cartoons
constructed by him. He judges, praises and condemns - all from the
narrowest possible point of view: that of the potential amount of
Narcissistic Supply. He asks not what he can do with the world and in
it - but what can the world do for him as far as Narcissistic Supply
goes. He falls in and out of love with people, workplaces, residences,
vocations, hobbies, interests - because they seem to be able to provide
more or less Narcissistic Supply and only because of that.

Still, narcissists belong to two broad categories: the "compensatory
stability" and the "enhancing instability" types.

I. Compensatory Stability ("Classic") Narcissists

These narcissists isolate one or more (but never most) aspects of their
lives and "make these aspect/s stable". They do not really invest
themselves in it. The stability is maintained by artificial means:
money, celebrity, power, fear. A typical example is a narcissist who
changes numerous workplaces, a few careers, a myriad of hobbies, value
systems or faiths. At the same time, he maintains (preserves) a
relationship with a single woman (and even remains faithful to her).
She is his "island of stability". To fulfil this role, she just needs
to be there physically.

The narcissist is dependent upon "his" woman to maintain the stability
lacking in all other areas of his life (=to compensate for his
instability). Yet, emotional closeness is bound to threaten the
narcissist.

Thus, he is likely to distance himself from her and to remain detached
and indifferent to most of her needs. Despite this cruel emotional
treatment, the narcissist considers her to be a point of exit, a form
of sustenance, a fountain of empowerment. This mismatch between what he
wishes to receive and what he is able to give, the narcissist prefers
to deny, repress and bury deep in his unconscious. This is why he is
always shocked and devastated to learn of his wife's estrangement,
infidelity, or divorce intentions. Possessed of no emotional depth,
being completely one track minded - he cannot fathom the needs of
others. In other words, he cannot empathise.

Another - even more common - case is the "career narcissist". This
narcissist marries, divorces and remarries with dizzying speed.
Everything in his life is in constant flux: friends, emotions,
judgements, values, beliefs, place of residence, affiliations, hobbies.
Everything, that is, except his work. His career is the island of
compensating stability in his volatile existence. This kind of
narcissist doggedly pursues it with unmitigated ambition and devotion.
He perseveres in one workplace or one job, patiently, persistently and
blindly climbing up the ladder or treading the career path. In his
pursuit of job fulfilment and achievements, the narcissist is ruthless
and unscrupulous - and, very often, most successful.

II. Enhancing Instability ("Borderline") Narcissist

The other kind of narcissist enhances instability in one aspect or
dimension of his life - by introducing instability in others. Thus, if
such a narcissist resigns (or, more likely, is made redundant) - he
also relocates to another city or country. If he divorces, he is also
likely to resign his job. This added instability gives these
narcissists the feeling that all the dimensions of their life are
changing simultaneously, that they are being "unshackled", that a
transformation is in progress. This, of course, is an illusion. Those
who know the narcissist, no longer trust his frequent "conversions",
"decisions", "crises", "transformations", "developments" and "periods".
They see through his pretensions and declarations into the core of his
instability. They know that he is not to be relied upon. They know that
with narcissists, temporariness is the only permanence.

Narcissists hate routine. When a narcissist finds himself doing the
same things over and over again, he gets depressed. He oversleeps,
over-eats, over-drinks and, in general, engages in addictive,
impulsive, reckless, and compulsive behaviours. This is his way of
re-introducing risk and excitement into what he (emotionally) perceives
to be a barren life.

The problem is that even the most exciting and varied existence becomes
routine after a while. Living in the same country or apartment, meeting
the same people, doing essentially the same things (even with changing
content) - all "qualify" as stultifying rote.

The narcissist feels entitled to more. He feels it is his right - due
to his intellectual superiority - to lead a thrilling, rewarding,
kaleidoscopic life. He feels entitled to force life itself, or, at
least, people around him, to yield to his wishes and needs, supreme
among them the need for stimulating variety.

This rejection of habit is part of a larger pattern of aggressive
entitlement. The narcissist feels that the very existence of a sublime
intellect (such as himself) warrants concessions and allowances by
others. Standing in line is a waste of time better spent pursuing
knowledge, inventing and creating. The narcissist should avail himself
of the best medical treatment proffered by the most prominent medical
authorities - lest the asset that he is lost to Mankind. He should not
be bothered with trivial pursuits - these lowly functions are best
assigned to the less gifted. The devil is in paying precious attention
to detail.

Entitlement is sometimes justified in a Picasso or an Einstein. But few
narcissists are either. Their achievements are grotesquely
incommensurate with their overwhelming sense of entitlement and with
their grandiose self-image.

Of course, the feeling of superiority often serves to mask a cancerous
complex of inferiority. Moreover, the narcissist infects others with
his projected grandiosity and their feedback constitutes the edifice
upon which he constructs his self-esteem. He regulates his sense of
self worth by rigidly insisting that he is above the madding crowd
while deriving his Narcissistic Supply from this very source.

But there is a second angle to this abhorrence of the predictable.
Narcissists employ a host of Emotional Involvement Prevention Measures
(EIPM). Despising routine and avoiding it is one of these mechanisms.
Their function is to prevent the narcissist from getting emotionally
involved and, subsequently, hurt.

Their application results in an "approach-avoidance repetition
complex". The narcissist, fearing and loathing intimacy, stability and
security - yet craving them - approaches and then avoids significant
others or important tasks in a rapid succession of apparently
inconsistent and disconnected behaviours.

]

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 24

Other People's Pain

Question: Do they actually enjoy the taunting, the sadistic behaviour,
and the punishment that always follows?

Answer: Most narcissists enjoy an irrational and brief burst of relief
after having suffered emotionally ("narcissistic injury") or after
having sustained a loss. It is a sense of freedom, which comes with
being unshackled. Having lost everything, the narcissist often feels
that he has found himself, that he has been re-born, that he has been
charged with natal energy, able to take on new challenges and to
explore new territories. This elation is so addictive, that the
narcissist often seeks pain, humiliation, punishment, scorn, and
contempt - as long as they are public and involve the attention of
peers and superiors. Being punished accords with the tormenting inner
voices of the narcissist which keep telling him that he is bad,
corrupt, and worthy of penalty.

This is the masochistic streak in the narcissist. But the narcissist is
also a sadist - albeit an unusual one.

The narcissist inflicts pain and abuse on others. He devalues Sources
of Supply, callously and off-handedly abandons them, and discards
people, places, partnerships, and friendships unhesitatingly. Some
narcissists - though by no means the majority - actually ENJOY abusing,
taunting, tormenting, and freakishly controlling others
("gaslighting"). But most of them do these things absentmindedly,
automatically, and, often, even without good reason.

What is unusual about the narcissist's sadistic behaviours -
premeditated acts of tormenting others while enjoying their anguished
reactions - is that they are goal orientated. "Pure" sadists have no
goal in mind except the pursuit of pleasure - pain as an art form
(remember the Marquis de Sade?).

The narcissist, on the other hand, haunts and hunts his victims for a
reason - he wants them to reflect his inner state. It is all part of a
mechanism called Projective Identification.

When the narcissist is angry, unhappy, disappointed, injured, or hurt -
he feels unable to express his emotions sincerely and openly since to
do so would be to admit his frailty, his neediness, and his weaknesses.
He deplores his own humanity - his emotions, his vulnerability, his
susceptibility, his gullibility, his inadequacies, and his failures.
So, he makes use of other people to express his pain and his
frustration, his pent up anger and his aggression. He achieves this by
mentally torturing other people to the point of madness, by driving
them to violence, by reducing them to scar tissue in search of outlet,
closure, and, sometimes, revenge. He forces people to lose their own
character traits - and adopt his own instead. In reaction to his
constant and well-targeted abuse, they become abusive, vengeful,
ruthless, lacking empathy, obsessed, and aggressive. They mirror him
faithfully and thus relieve him of the need to express himself directly.

Having constructed this writhing hall of human mirrors, the narcissist
withdraws. The goal achieved, he lets go. As opposed to the sadist, he
is no in it, indefinitely, for the pleasure of it. He abuses and
traumatizes, humiliates and abandons, discards and ignores, insults and
provokes - only for the purpose of purging his inner demons. By
possessing others, he purifies himself, cathartically, and exorcises
his demented self.

This accomplished, he acts almost with remorse. An episode of extreme
abuse is followed by an act of great care and by mellifluous apologies.
The narcissistic pendulum swings between the extremes of torturing
others and empathically soothing the resulting pain. This incongruous
behaviour, these "sudden" shifts between sadism and altruism, abuse and
"love", ignoring and caring, abandoning and clinging, viciousness and
remorse, the harsh and the tender - are, perhaps, the most difficult to
comprehend and to accept. These swings produce in people around the
narcissist emotional insecurity, an eroded sense of self-worth, fear,
stress, and anxiety ("walking on eggshells"). Gradually, emotional
paralysis ensues and they come to occupy the same emotional wasteland
inhabited by the narcissist, his prisoners and hostages in more ways
than one - and even when he is long out of their life.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 39

To Age with Grace

"The permanent temptation of life is to confuse dreams with reality.
Then permanent defeat of life comes when dreams are surrendered to
reality."

James Michener, Author

The narcissist ages without mercy and without grace. His withered body
and his overwrought mind betray him all at once. He stares with
incredulity and rage at cruel mirrors. He refuses to accept his growing
fallibility. He rebels against his decrepitude and mediocrity.
Accustomed to being awe-inspiring and the recipient of adulation - the
narcissist cannot countenance his social isolation and the pathetic
figure that he cuts.

As a child prodigy, a sex symbol, a stud, a public intellectual, an
actor, an idol - the narcissist was at the centre of attention, the eye
of his personal twister, a black hole which sucked people's energy and
resources dry and spat out with indifference their mutilated carcasses.
No longer. With old age comes disillusionment. Old charms wear thin.

Having been exposed for what he is - a deceitful, treacherous,
malignant egotist - the narcissist's old tricks now fail him. People
are on their guard, their gullibility reduced. The narcissist - being
the rigid, precariously balanced structure that he is - can't change.
He reverts to old forms, re-adopts hoary habits, succumbs to erstwhile
temptations. He is made a mockery by his accentuated denial of reality,
by his obdurate refusal to grow up, an eternal, malformed child in the
sagging body of a decaying man.

It is the fable of the grasshopper and the ant revisited.

The narcissist - the grasshopper - having relied on supercilious
stratagems throughout his life - is singularly ill-adapted to life's
rigors and tribulations. He feels entitled - but fails to elicit
Narcissistic Supply. Wrinkled time makes child prodigies lose their
magic, lovers exhaust their potency, philanderers waste their allure,
and geniuses miss their touch. The longer the narcissist lives - the
more average he becomes. The wider the gulf between his pretensions and
his accomplishments - the more he is the object of derision and
contempt.

Yet, few narcissists save for rainy days. Few bother to study a trade,
or get a degree, pursue a career, maintain a business, keep their jobs,
or raise functioning families, nurture their friendships, or broaden
their horizons. Narcissists are perennially ill-prepared. Those who
succeed in their vocation, end up bitterly alone having squandered the
love of spouse, off-spring, and mates. The more gregarious and
family-orientated - often flunk at work, leap from one job to another,
relocate erratically, forever itinerant and peripatetic.

The contrast between his youth and prime and his dilapidated present
constitutes a permanent narcissistic injury. The narcissist retreats
deeper into himself to find solace. He withdraws into the penumbral
universe of his grandiose fantasies. There - almost psychotic - he
salves his wounds and comforts himself with trophies of his past.

A rare minority of narcissists accept their fate with fatalism or good
humour. These precious few are healed mysteriously by the deepest
offence to their megalomania - old age. They lose their narcissism and
confront the outer world with the poise and composure that they lacked
when they were captives of their own, distorted, narrative.

Such changed narcissists develop new, more realistic, expectations and
hopes - commensurate with their talents, skills, accomplishments and
education. Ironically, it is invariably too late. They are avoided and
ignored, rendered transparent by their checkered past. They are passed
over for promotion, never invited to professional or social gatherings,
cold-shouldered by the media. They are snubbed and disregarded. They
are never the recipients of perks, benefits, or awards. They are blamed
when not blameworthy and rarely praised when deserving. They are being
constantly and consistently punished for who they were. It is poetic
justice in more than one way. They are being treated narcissistically
by their erstwhile victims.

They finally are tasting their own medicine, the bitter harvest of
their wrath and arrogance.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 49

The Inverted Narcissist

With contributions by: Alice Ratzlaff (*) and

The members of the Narcissism List

THE CLINICAL PICTURE AND DEVELOPMENTAL ROOTS -

OPENING REMARKS

Terminology

Co-dependents

People who depend on other people for their emotional gratification and
the performance of Ego or daily functions. They are needy, demanding,
submissive. They fear abandonment, cling and display immature
behaviours in their effort to maintain the "relationship" with their
companion or mate upon whom they depend. No matter what abuse is
inflicted upon them - they remain in the relationship.

See also the definition of the Dependent Personality Disorder in the
DSM-IV-TR.

Inverted Narcissist

Previously called "covert narcissist", this is a co-dependent who
depends exclusively on narcissists (narcissist-co-dependent). If you
live with a narcissist, have a relationship with one, are married to
one, work with a narcissist, etc. - it does NOT mean that you are an
inverted narcissist.

To "qualify" as an inverted narcissist - you must CRAVE to be in a
relationship with a narcissist, regardless of any abuse inflicted on
you by him/her.

You must ACTIVELY seek relationships with narcissists - and ONLY with
narcissists - no matter what your (bitter and traumatic) past
experience has been. You must feel EMPTY and UNHAPPY in relationships
with ANY OTHER kind of person. Only THEN - AND if you satisfy the other
diagnostic criteria of a Dependent Personality Disorder - can you be
safely labelled an "inverted narcissist".

Introduction

The DSM-IV-TR uses 9 criteria to define the NPD. It is sufficient to
possess 5 of them to "qualify" as a narcissist. Thus, theoretically, it
is possible to be NPD WITHOUT being grandiose. Many researchers
(Alexander Lowen, Jeffrey Satinover, Theodore Millon and others)
suggested a "taxonomy" of pathological narcissism. They divided
narcissists to sub-groups (very much as I did with my somatic versus
cerebral narcissist dichotomy). Lowen, for instance, talks about the
"phallic" narcissist versus others. Satinover and Millon make a very
important distinction between narcissists who were raised by abusive
parents - and those who were raised by doting and smothering or
domineering mothers.

Glenn O. Gabbard in "Psychodynamic Psychiatry in Clinical Practice"
[The DSM-IV-TR Edition. Comments on Cluster B Personality Disorders -
Narcissistic. American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 2000] we find this:

"...what definitive criteria can be used to differentiate healthy from
pathological narcissism? The time honoured criteria of psychological
health - to love and to work - are only partly useful in answering this
question."

"An individual's work history may provide little help in making the
distinction. Highly disturbed narcissistic individuals may find
extraordinary success in certain professions, such as big business, the
arts, politics, the entertainment industry, athletics and televangelism
field. In some cases, however, narcissistic pathology may be reflected
in a superficial quality to one's professional interests, as though
achievement in and acclaim are more important than mastery of the field
itself.

Pathological forms of narcissism are more easily identified by the
quality of the individual's relationships.

One tragedy affecting these people is their inability to love. Healthy
interpersonal relationships can be recognised by qualities such as
empathy and concern for the feelings of others, a genuine interest in
the ideas of others, the ability to tolerate ambivalence in long-term
relationships without giving up, and a capacity to acknowledge one's
own contribution to interpersonal conflicts. People who are
characterised by these qualities may at times use others to gratify
their own needs, but the tendency occurs in the broader context of
sensitive interpersonal relatedness rather than as a pervasive style of
dealing with other people. One the other hand, the person with a
Narcissistic Personality Disorder approaches people as objects to be
used up and discarded according to his or her needs, without regard for
their feelings.

People are not viewed as having a separate existence or as having needs
of their own. The individual with a Narcissistic Personality Disorder
frequently ends a relationship after a short time, usually when the
other person begins to make demands stemming from for his or her own
needs. Most importantly, such relationships clearly do not 'work' in
terms of the narcissist's ability to maintain his or her own sense of
self-esteem."

"...These criteria [the DSM-IV-TR's - SV] identify a certain kind of
narcissistic patient - specifically, the arrogant, boastful, 'noisy'
individual who demands to be in the spotlight. However, they fail to
characterise the shy, quietly grandiose, narcissistic individual whose
extreme sensitivity to slights leads to an assiduous avoidance of the
spotlight."

The DSM-III-R alluded to at least TWO TYPES of narcissists, but the
DSM-IV-TR committee chose to delete this: "...included criterion,
'reacts to criticism with feelings of rage, shame, or humiliation (even
not if expressed)' due to lack of 'specificity'."

Other theoreticians, clinicians and researchers similarly suggested a
division between "the oblivious narcissist" (a.k.a. overt) and "the
hypervigilant narcissist" (a.k.a. covert).

The Compensatory versus the Classic Narcissist

Another interesting distinction, suggested by Dave Kelly in his
excellent PTYPES Web site [http://www.ptypes.com] is between the
Compensatory Type NPD and the Classic NPD (DSM-IV-TR type).

Here are the Compensatory NPD criteria according to Dave Kelly:

"Personality Types proposes Compensatory Narcissistic Personality
Disorder as a pervasive pattern of unstable, covert narcissistic
behaviours that derive from an underlying sense of insecurity and
weakness rather than from genuine feelings of self-confidence and high
self-esteem, beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of
contexts, as indicated by six (or more) of the criteria below.

The basic trait of the Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Type is a
pattern of overtly narcissistic behaviours (that) derive from an
underlying sense of insecurity and weakness, rather than from genuine
feelings of self-confidence and high self-esteem."

The Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Type:

_        Seeks to create an illusion of superiority and to build up an
image of high self-worth [Millon];

_        Strives for recognition and prestige to compensate for the lack
of a feeling of self-worth;

_        May "acquire a deprecatory attitude in which the achievements
of others are ridiculed and degraded" [Millon];

_        Has persistent aspirations for glory and status [Millon];

_        Has a tendency to exaggerate and boast [Millon];

_        Is sensitive to how others react to him, watches and listens
carefully for critical judgement, and feels slighted by disapproval
[Millon];

_        "Is prone to feel shamed and humiliated and especially
(anxious) and vulnerable to the judgements of others" [Millon];

_        Covers up a sense of inadequacy and deficiency with
pseudo-arrogance and pseudo-grandiosity [Millon];

_        Has a tendency to periodic hypochondria [Forman];

_        Alternates between feelings of emptiness and deadness and
states of excitement and excess energy [Forman];

_        Entertains fantasies of greatness, constantly striving for
perfection, genius, or stardom [Forman];

_        Has a history of searching for an idealised partner and has an
intense need for affirmation and confirmation in relationships [Forman];

_        Frequently entertains a wishful, exaggerated and unrealistic
concept of himself, which he can't possibly measure up to [Reich];

_        Produces (too quickly) work not up to the level of his
abilities because of an overwhelmingly strong need for the immediate
gratification of success [Reich];

_        Is touchy, quick to take offence at the slightest provocation,
continually anticipating attack and danger, reacting with anger and
fantasies of revenge when he feels himself frustrated in his need for
constant admiration [Reich];

_        Is self-conscious, due to a dependence on approval from others
[Reich];

_        Suffers regularly from repetitive oscillations of self-esteem
[Reich];

_        Seeks to undo feelings of inadequacy by forcing everyone's
attention and admiration upon himself [Reich];

_        May react with self-contempt and depression to the lack of
fulfilment of his grandiose expectations [Riso].

Sources:

Forman, Max. Narcissistic Disorders and the Oedipal Fixations. In
Feldstein, J.J. (Ed.), The Annual of Psychoanalysis. Volume IV. New
York: International Universities [1976] pp. 65-92.

Millon, Theodore, and Roger D. Davis. Disorders of Personality: DSM-IV
and Beyond. 2nd Ed. New York: Wiley, [1996] pp. 411-12.

Reich, Annie, [1986]. Pathological Forms of Self-Esteem Regulation. In
Morrison, A. P., (Ed.), Essential Papers on Narcissism. pp. 44-60.
Reprint from 1960. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child. Volume 15, pp.
205-32.

Riso, Don Richard. Personality Types: Using the Enneagram for
Self-Discovery. Boston: Houghton Mifflin [1987] pp. 102-3.

Speculative Diagnostic Criteria for

Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Disorder

A pervasive pattern of self-inflation, pseudo-confidence,
exhibitionism, and strivings for prestige, that compensates for
feelings of inadequacy and low self-esteem, as indicated by the
following:

_        Pseudo-confidence compensating for an underlying condition of
insecurity and feelings of helplessness;

_        Pretentiousness, self-inflation;

_        Exhibitionism in the pursuit of attention, recognition, and
glory;

_        Strivings for prestige to enhance self-esteem;

_        Deceitfulness and manipulativeness in the service of
maintaining feelings of superiority;

_        Idealisation in relationships;

_        Fragmentation of the self: feelings of emptiness and deadness;

_        A proud, hubristic disposition;

_        Hypochondriasis;

_        Substance abuse;

_        Self-destructiveness.

Compensatory Narcissistic Personality Disorder corresponds to Ernest
Jones' narcissistic "God Complex", Annie Reich's "Compensatory
Narcissism", Heinz Kohut's "Narcissistic Personality Disorder", and
Theodore Millon's "Compensatory Narcissist".

Millon, Theodore, and Roger D. Davis. Disorders of Personality: DSM-IV
and Beyond. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 1996. 411-12.

Compare this to the classic type:

Narcissistic Personality Type

The basic trait of the Narcissistic Personality Type is a pattern of
grandiosity, need for admiration, and lack of empathy.

The Narcissistic Personality Type:

_        Reacts to criticism with feelings of rage, shame, or
humiliation;

_        Is interpersonally exploitive: takes advantage of others to
achieve his own ends;

_        Has a grandiose sense of self-importance;

_        Believes that his problems are unique and can be understood
only by other special people;

_        Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power,
brilliance, beauty, or ideal love;

_        Has a sense of entitlement: an unreasonable expectation of
especially favourable treatment;

_        Requires much attention and admiration of others;

_        Lacks empathy: fails to recognise and experience how others
feel;

_        Is preoccupied with feelings of envy.

This is mainly the DSM-III-R view. Pay attention to the not so subtle
changes in the DSM-IV-TR - SV:

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders [American
Psychiatric Association. DSM-IV-TR, Washington, 2000] describes
Narcissistic Personality Disorder as a pervasive pattern of grandiosity
(in fantasy or behaviour), need for admiration, and lack of empathy,
beginning by early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts, as
indicated by five (or more) of the following:

_        Has a grandiose sense of self-importance (e.g., exaggerates
achievements and talents, expects to be recognised as superior without
commensurate achievements);

_        Is preoccupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power,
brilliance, beauty, or ideal love;

_        Believes that he or she is "special" and unique and can only be
understood by, or should associate with, other special or high-status
people (or institutions);

_        Requires excessive admiration;

_        Has a sense of entitlement, i.e., unreasonable expectations of
especially favourable treatment or automatic compliance with his or her
expectations;

_        Is interpersonally exploitive, i.e., takes advantage of others
to achieve his or her own ends;

_        Lacks empathy: is unwilling to recognise or identify with the
feelings and needs of others;

_        Is often envious of others or believes that others are envious
of him or her;

_        Shows arrogant, haughty behaviours or attitudes.

Summarised from: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-IV-TR, Washington [2000]

The Inverted Narcissist

It is clear that there is, indeed, an hitherto neglected type of
narcissist. It is the "self-effacing" or "introverted" narcissist. We
call it the Inverted Narcissist (hereinafter: IN). Others call it
"narcissist-codependent" or "N-magnet".

This is a narcissist who, in many respects, is the mirror image of the
"classical" narcissist. No one is sure why. The psychodynamics of such
a narcissist are not clear, nor are its developmental roots. Perhaps it
is the product of an overweening Primary Object or caregiver. Perhaps
excessive abuse leads to the repression of even the narcissistic and
other defence mechanisms. Perhaps the parents suppress every
manifestation of grandiosity (very common in early childhood) and of
narcissism - so that the narcissistic defence mechanism is "inverted"
and internalised in this unusual form.

These narcissists are self-effacing, sensitive, emotionally fragile,
sometimes socially phobic. They derive all their self-esteem and sense
of self-worth from the outside (others), are pathologically envious (a
transformation of aggression), are likely to intermittently engage in
aggressive/violent behaviours, are more emotionally labile than the
classic narcissist, etc.

We can, therefore talk about three "basic" types of narcissists:

1.        The offspring of neglecting parents - They resort to narcissism
as the predominant object relation (with themselves as the exclusive
object).

2.        The offspring of doting or domineering parents (often
narcissists themselves) - They internalised their parents' voices in
the form of a sadistic, ideal, immature Superego and spend their lives
trying to be perfect, omnipotent, omniscient and to be judged "a
success" by these parent-images and their later representations
(authority figures).

3.        The offspring of abusive parents - They internalise the
abusing, demeaning and contemptuous voices and spend their lives in an
effort to elicit "counter-voices" from their human environment and thus
to extract a modicum of self-esteem and sense of self-worth.

All three types exhibit recursive, recurrent and Sisyphean failures.
Shielded by their defence mechanisms, they constantly gauge reality
wrongly, their actions and reactions become more and more rigid and
ossified and the damage inflicted by them on themselves and on others
ever greater.

The narcissistic parent seems to employ a myriad of primitive defences
in his dealings with his children. Splitting - idealising the child and
devaluing him in cycles, which reflect the internal dynamics of the
parent rather than anything the child does. Projective Identification -
forcing the child into behaviours and traits, which reflect the
parents' fears regarding himself or herself, his or her self-image and
his or her self-worth. This is a particularly powerful and pernicious
mechanism. If the narcissist parent fears his own deficiencies
("defects"), vulnerability, perceived weaknesses, susceptibility,
gullibility, or emotions - he is likely to force the child to "feel"
these rejected and (to him) repulsive emotions, to behave in ways
strongly abhorred by the parent, to exhibit character traits the parent
strongly rejects in himself.

The child, in a way, becomes the "trash bin" of the parents'
inhibitions, fears, self-loathing, self-contempt, perceived lack of
self-worth, sense of inadequacy, rejected traits, repressed emotions,
failures and emotional reticence. Coupled with the parent's treatment
of the child as the parent's extension, it serves to totally inhibit
the psychological growth and emotional maturation of the child. The
child becomes a reflection of the parent - a vessel through which the
parent experiences and realises himself for better (hopes, aspirations,
ambition, life goals) and for worse (weaknesses, "undesirable"
emotions, "negative" traits).

A host of other, simpler, defence mechanisms employed by the parent are
likely to obscure the predominant use of projective identification:
projection, displacement, intellectualisation, depersonalisation.
Relationships between such parents and their progeny easily deteriorate
to sexual or other modes of abuse because there are no functioning
boundaries between them.

It seems that the child's reaction to a narcissistic parent can be
either accommodation and assimilation or rejection.

Accommodation and Assimilation

The child accommodates, idealises and internalises the Primary Object
successfully. This means that the child's "internal voice" is
narcissistic and that the child tries to comply with its directives and
with its explicit and perceived wishes. The child becomes a masterful
provider of Narcissistic Supply, a perfect match to the parent's
personality, an ideal source, an accommodating, understanding and
caring caterer to all the needs, whims, mood swings and cycles of the
narcissist, an endurer of devaluation and idealisation with equanimity,
a superb adapter to the narcissist's world view, in short: the ultimate
extension. This is what we call an "inverted narcissist".

We must not neglect the abusive aspect of such a relationship. The
narcissistic parent always alternates between idealisation of his
progeny and its devaluation. The child is likely to internalise the
devaluing, abusive, demeaning, berating, diminishing, minimising,
upbraiding, chastising voices. The parent (or caregiver) goes on to
survive inside the adult (as part of a sadistic and ideal Superego and
an unrealistic Ego Ideal, to resort to psychoanalytic parlance). These
are the voices that inhibit the development of reactive narcissism, the
child's defence mechanism.

The child turned adult maintains these traits. He keeps looking for
narcissists in order to feel whole, alive and wanted. He wishes to be
treated by a narcissist narcissistically (what others would call abuse
is, to him or her, familiar and constitutes Narcissistic Supply). To
him, the narcissist is a Source of Supply (primary or secondary) and
the narcissistic behaviours constitute Narcissistic Supply. He feels
dissatisfied, empty and unloved if not loved by a narcissist.

The roles of Primary Source of Narcissistic Supply (PSNS) and Secondary
Source of Narcissistic Supply (SSNS) are reversed. To the inverted
narcissist, a spouse is a Source of PRIMARY Supply.

The other reaction to the narcissistic parent is:

Rejection

The child may react to the narcissism of the Primary Object with a
peculiar type of rejection. He develops his own narcissistic
personality, replete with grandiosity and lack of empathy - BUT his
personality is antithetical to the personality of the narcissistic
parent. If the parent were a somatic narcissist - he is likely to be a
cerebral one, if his father prided himself being virtuous - he is
sinful, if his mother bragged about her frugality, he is bound to
flaunt his wealth.

An Attempted DSM-Style List of Criteria

We came up with a DSM-IV-TR "style" inventory for an inverted
narcissist, using the narcissists' characteristics as a template,
because they are, in many ways two sides of the same coin, or "the
mould and the moulded" hence "mirror narcissist" or "inverted
narcissist".

The narcissist tries to merge with an idealised but badly internalised
object. He does so by "digesting" the meaningful others in his life and
transforming them into extensions of his self. He employs various
techniques to achieve this. To the "digested" this is the crux of the
harrowing experience called "living with a narcissist".

The "inverted narcissist" (IN), on the other hand, does not attempt,
except in fantasy or in dangerous, masochistic sexual practice, to
merge with an idealised external object. This is because he so
successfully internalised the narcissistic Primary Object to the
exclusion of all else. The IN feels ill at ease in a relationship with
a non-narcissist because it is unconsciously perceived by him to be
"betrayal", "cheating", an abrogation of the exclusivity clause he had
with the narcissistic Primary Object.

This is the big difference between narcissists and their inverted
version. The former REJECTED the Primary Object in particular (and
object relations in general) in favour of a handy substitute:
themselves.

The IN accepted the (narcissist) Primary Object and internalised it -
to the exclusion of all others (unless they are perceived by him to be
faithful renditions, replicas of the narcissistic Primary Object).

Criterion ONE

The IN possesses a rigid sense of lack of self-worth.

The narcissist has a badly regulated sense of self-worth. However this
is not conscious. He goes through cycles of self-devaluation (and
experiences them as dysphorias). The IN's sense of self-worth does NOT
fluctuate. It is rather stable - but it is very low. Whereas the
narcissist devalues others - the IN devalues himself as an offering, a
sacrifice to the narcissist. The IN pre-empts the narcissist by
devaluing himself, by actively devaluing his own achievements, or
talents. The IN is exceedingly distressed when singled out because of
actual achievements or demonstration of superior skills.

The inverted narcissist is compelled to filter all of his narcissistic
needs through the primary narcissist in their lives. No independence is
permitted. The IN feels amplified by the narcissist's commentary
(because nothing can be accomplished by the invert without the approval
of a primary narcissist in their lives).

Criterion TWO

Pre-occupied with fantasies of unlimited success, power, brilliance and
beauty or of an ideal of love.

This is the same as the DSM-IV-TR criterion for Narcissistic
Personality Disorder but, with the IN, it manifests absolutely
differently, i.e. the cognitive dissonance is sharper here because the
IN is so absolutely and completely convinced of their worthlessness
that these fantasies of grandeur are extremely painful "dissonances".

With the narcissist, the dissonance exists on two levels:

Between the UNCONSCIOUS feeling of lack of stable self-worth and the
grandiose fantasies AND between the grandiose fantasies and reality
(the Grandiosity Gap).

In comparison, the inverted narcissist can only vacillate between lack
of self-worth and reality. No grandiosity is permitted, except in
dangerous, forbidden fantasy. This shows that the invert is
psychologically incapable of fully realising their inherent potentials
without a primary narcissist to filter the praise, adulation or
accomplishments through. They MUST have someone to whom praise can be
redirected.

The dissonance between the IN's certainty of self-worthlessness and
genuine praise that cannot be deflected is likely to emotionally derail
the inverted narcissist every time.

Criterion THREE

Believes that he is absolutely un-unique and un-special (i.e.,
worthless and not worthy of merger with the fantasised ideal) and that
no one at all could understand him because he is innately unworthy of
being understood. The IN becomes very agitated the more one tries to
understand him because that also offends against his righteous sense of
being properly excluded from the human race.

A sense of worthlessness is typical of many other PDs (AND the feeling
that no one could ever understand them). The narcissist himself endures
prolonged periods of self-devaluation, self-deprecation and
self-effacement. This is part of the Narcissistic Cycle. In this sense,
the inverted narcissist is a PARTIAL narcissist in that he is
permanently fixated in a part of the narcissist wheel, never to
experience its complementary half: the narcissistic grandiosity and
sense of entitlement.

The "righteous sense of being properly excluded" comes from the
sadistic Superego in concert with the "overbearing, externally
reinforced, conscience".

Criterion FOUR

Demands anonymity (in the sense of seeking to remain excluded at all
costs) and is intensely irritated and uncomfortable with any attention
being paid to him - similar to the Schizoid PD.

Criterion FIVE

Feels that he is undeserving and not entitled.

Feels that he is inferior to others, lacking, insubstantial, unworthy,
unlikeable, unlovable, someone to scorn and dismiss, or to ignore.

Criterion SIX

Is extinguishingly selfless, sacrificial, even unctuous in his
interpersonal relationships and will avoid the assistance of others at
all costs. Can only interact with others when he can be seen to be
giving, supportive, and expending an unusual effort to assist.

Some narcissists behave the same way but only as a means to obtain
Narcissistic Supply (praise, adulation, affirmation, attention). This
must not be confused with the behaviour of the IN.

Criterion SEVEN

Lacks empathy. Is intensely attuned to others' needs, but only in so
far as it relates to his own need to perform the required
self-sacrifice, which in turn is necessary in order for the IN to
obtain his Narcissistic Supply from the primary narcissist.

By contrast, narcissists are never empathic. They are intermittently
attuned to others only in order to optimise the extraction of
Narcissistic Supply from them.

Criterion EIGHT

Envies others. Cannot conceive of being envied and becomes extremely
agitated and uncomfortable if even brought into a situation where
comparison might occur - loathes competition and will avoid competition
at all costs, if there is any chance of actually winning the
competition, or being singled out.

Criterion NINE

Displays extreme shyness, lack of any real relational connections, is
publicly self-effacing in the extreme, is internally highly moralistic
and critical of others; is a perfectionist and engages in lengthy
ritualistic behaviours, which can never be perfectly performed
(obsessive-compulsive, though not necessarily to the full extent
exhibited in OCD). Notions of being individualistic are anathema.

The Reactive Patterns of the Inverted Narcissist (IN)

The inverted narcissist does not suffer from a "milder" form of
narcissism. Like the "classic" narcissists, it has degrees and shades.
But it is much more rare and the DSM-IV-TR variety is the more
prevalent.

The inverted narcissist is liable to react with rage whenever
threatened, or...

...When envious of other people's achievements, their ability to feel
wholeness, happiness, rewards and successes, when his sense of
self-worthlessness is enhanced by a behaviour, a comment, an event,
when his lack of self-worth and voided self-esteem is THREATENED.

Thus, this type of narcissist might surprisingly react violently or
rage-fully to GOOD things: a kind remark, a mission accomplished, a
reward, a compliment, a proposition, a sexual advance).

...When thinking about the past, when emotions and memories are evoked
(usually negative ones) by certain music, a given smell, or sight.

...When his pathological envy leads to an all-pervasive sense of
injustice and being discriminated against or treated unjustly by a
spiteful world.

...When he encounters stupidity, avarice, dishonesty, bigotry - it is
these qualities in him that the narcissist really fears and rejects so
vehemently in others.

...When he believes that he failed (and he always entertains this
belief), that he is imperfect and useless and worthless, a good for
nothing half-baked creature.

...When he realises to what extent his inner demons possess him,
constrain his life, torment him, deform him and the hopelessness of it
all.

Then even the inverted narcissist rages. He becomes verbally and
emotionally abusive. He uncannily pierces the soft spots of his target,
and mercilessly drives home the poisoned dagger of despair and
self-loathing until it infects his adversary.

The calm after such a storm is even eerier, a thundering silence. The
narcissist regrets his behaviour but rarely admits his feelings, though
he might apologise profusely.

He simply nurtures his feelings as yet another weapon of
self-destruction and self-defeat. It is from this very suppressed
self-contempt, from this very repressed and introverted judgement, from
this missing emotional atonement that the narcissistic rage springs
forth. Thus the vicious cycle is established.

One important difference between inverted narcissists and
non-narcissists is that the former are less likely to react with PTSD
(Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) following a relationship with a
narcissist. They seem to be "desensitised" to narcissists by their
early upbringing. Whereas the reactions of normal people to
narcissistic behaviour patterns (and especially to the splitting and
projective identification defence mechanisms and to the idealisation
devaluation cycles) is shock, profound hurt and disorientation -
inverted narcissists show none of the above.

The Life of the Inverted Narcissist (IN)

The IN is, usually, exceedingly and painfully shy as a child. Despite
this social phobia, his grandiosity (absorbed from the parent) might
direct him to seek "limelight" professions and occupations, which
involve exposure, competition, "stage fright" and social friction. The
setting can vary from the limited (family) to the expansive (national
media) - but, whatever it is, the result is constant conflict and
feelings of discomfort, even terror and extreme excitement and thrill
("adrenaline rush"). This is because the IN's grandiosity is "imported"
and not fully integrated. It is, therefore, not supportive of his
"grandiose" pursuits (as is the case with the narcissist). On the
contrary, the IN feels awkward, pitted on the edge of a precipice,
contrived, false and misleading, not to say deceitful.

The inverted narcissist grows up in a suppressive environment. It could
be an orthodox, hyper-religious, or traditionalist culture, a
monovalent, "black and white", doctrinarian and indoctrinating society
- or a family which manifests all the above in a microcosm all its own.
The inverted narcissist is cast in a negative (emergent) role within
his family. His "negativity" is attributed to his gender, the order of
his birth, religious, social, or cultural dictates and commandments,
his "character flaws", his relation to a specific person or event, his
acts or inaction and so on.

In the words of one such IN:

"In the religious culture I grew up in. Women are SO suppressed, their
roles are so carefully restricted. They are the representation, in the
flesh, of all that is sinful, degrading, of all that is wrong with the
world.

These are the negative gender/cultural images that were force fed to us
the negative 'otherness' of women, as defined by men, was fed to me. I
was so shy, withdrawn, unable to really relate to people at all from as
early as I can remember."

The IN is subjected and exposed either to an overbearing, overvalued
parent, or to an aloof, detached, emotionally unavailable one - or to
both - at an early stage of his life.

"I grew up in the shadow of my father who adored me, put me on a
pedestal, told me I could do or be anything I wanted because I was
incredibly bright, BUT, he ate me alive, I was his property and an
extension of him.

I also grew up with the mounting hatred of my narcissist brother who
got none of this attention from our father and got no attention from
our mother either. My function was to make my father look wonderful in
the eyes of all outsiders, the wonderful parent with a genius
Wunderkind as his last child, and the only child of the six that he was
physically present to raise from the get go. The overvaluation combined
with being abjectly ignored or raged at by him when I stepped out of
line even the tiniest bit, was enough to warp my personality."

The invert cannot, or is prevented from developing full-blown secondary
narcissism. The invert is so heavily preoccupied in his or her
pre-school years in satisfying the narcissistic parent, that the traits
of grandiosity and self-love, need for adoration and Narcissistic
Supply from ANY viable source remain dormant or repressed.

The invert simply "knows" that only the narcissistic parent can provide
the requisite amount of Narcissistic Supply. The narcissistic parent is
so controlling that any attempt to garner praise or adulation from any
other source (without the approval of the parent) is severely punished
by swift devaluation and even the occasional spanking or abuse
(physical, emotional, or sexual).

This is a vital part of the conditioning that gives rise to inverted
narcissism. Where the narcissist exhibits grandiosity, the invert is
intensely uncomfortable with personal praise, and wishes to always
divert praise away from himself onto his narcissist. This is why the IN
can only truly FEEL anything when he is in relationship with another
narcissist. The IN is conditioned and programmed from the very
beginning to be the perfect companion to the narcissist. To feed their
Ego, to be purely their extension, to seek only praise and adulation if
it brings greater praise and adulation to the narcissist.

The Inverted Narcissist's Survival Guide

_        Listen attentively to everything the narcissist says and agree
with it all.

Don't believe a word of it but let it slide as if everything is just
fine, business as usual.

_        Offer something absolutely unique to the narcissist which they
cannot obtain anywhere else.

Also be prepared to line up future Sources of Primary NS for your
narcissist because you will not be IT for very long, if at all. If you
take over the procuring function for the narcissist, they become that
much more dependent on you which makes it a bit tougher for them to
pull their haughty stuff - an inevitability, in any case.

_        Be endlessly patient and go way out of your way to be
accommodating, thus keeping the Narcissistic Supply flowing liberally,
and keeping the peace (relatively speaking).

_        Get tremendous personal satisfaction out of endlessly giving.
This one may not be attractive to you, but it is a take it or leave it
proposition.

_        Be absolutely emotionally and financially independent of the
narcissist. Take what you need: the excitement and engulfment (i.e.,
NS) and refuse to get upset or hurt when the narcissist does or says
something dumb. Yelling back works really well but should be reserved
for special occasions when you fear your narcissist may be on the verge
of leaving you; the silent treatment is better as an ordinary response,
but it must be devoid of emotional content, more with the air of
boredom and "I'll talk to you later, when I am good and ready, and when
you are behaving in a more reasonable fashion."

_        If your narcissist is cerebral and NOT interested in having
much sex - then give yourself ample permission to have sex with other
people. Your cerebral narcissist will not be indifferent to infidelity
so discretion and secrecy is of paramount importance.

_        If your narcissist is somatic and you don't mind, join in on
endlessly interesting group sex encounters but make sure that you
choose properly for your narcissist. They are heedless and very
undiscriminating in respect of sexual partners and that can get very
problematic (STDs and blackmail come to mind).

_        If you are a "fixer" which most inverted narcissists are, then
focus on fixing situations, preferably before they become "situations".
Don't for one moment delude yourself that you can FIX the narcissist -
it simply will not happen. Not because they are being stubborn - they
just simply can't be fixed.

_        If there is any fixing that can be done, it is to help your
narcissist become aware of their condition, and this is VERY IMPORTANT,
with no negative implications or accusations in the process at all.

It is like living with a physically handicapped person and being able
to discuss, calmly, unemotionally, what the limitations and benefits of
the handicap are and how the two of you can work with these factors,
rather than trying to change them.

_        FINALLY, and most important of all for the inverted narcissist:
KNOW YOURSELF.

What are you getting from the relationship? Are you actually a
masochist?

Why is this relationship attractive and interesting?

Define for yourself what good and beneficial things you believe you are
receiving in this relationship. Define the things that you find harmful
TO YOU. Develop strategies to minimise the harm to yourself.

Don't expect that you will cognitively be able to reason with the
narcissist to change who they are. You may have some limited success in
getting your narcissist to tone down on the really harmful behaviours
THAT AFFECT YOU, which emanate from the unchangeable WHAT the
narcissist is. This can only be accomplished in a very trusting, frank
and open relationship.

We firmly believe that it is only the inverted narcissist who can have
a reasonably good, long lasting relationship with the narcissist. You
must be prepared to give your narcissist a LOT of space and leeway.

You don't really exist for them as a fully realised person - no one
does. They are not fully realised people so they cannot possibly have
the skills, no matter how smart or sexy, to be a complete person in the
sense that most adults are complete.

Somatic versus Cerebral Inverted Narcissists (IN)

The inverted narcissist is really an erstwhile narcissist internalised
by the IN. Inevitably, we are likely to find among the inverted the
same propensities, predilections, preferences and inclinations as we do
among proper narcissists.

The cerebral IN is an IN whose source of vicarious Primary Narcissistic
Supply lies - through the medium and mediation of a narcissist - in the
exercise of his intellectual faculties. A somatic IN would tend to make
use of his body, sex, shape or health in trying to secure NS for "his"
narcissist.

The inverted narcissist feeds on the primary narcissist and this is his
Narcissistic Supply. So these two typologies can, in essence become a
self-supporting, symbiotic system. In reality though, both the
narcissist and the inverted narcissist need to be quite well aware of
the dynamics of this relationship in order to make this work as a
successful long-term arrangement. It might well be that this symbiosis
would only work between a cerebral narcissist and a cerebral invert.
The somatic narcissist's capricious sexual dalliances would be far too
threatening to the equanimity of the cerebral invert for there to be
much chance of this succeeding, even for a short time.

It would seem that only opposing types of narcissists can get along
when two classic narcissists are involved in a couple. It follows,
syllogistically, that only identical types of narcissist and inverted
narcissist can survive in a couple. In other words: the best, most
enduring couples of narcissist and his inverted narcissist mate would
involve a somatic narcissist and a somatic IN - or a cerebral
narcissist and a cerebral IN.

Coping with Narcissists and Non-Narcissists

The inverted narcissist is a person who grew up enthralled by the
narcissistic parent. This parent engulfed and subsumed the child's
being to such an over-bearing extent that the child's personality was
irrevocably shaped by this engulfment, damaged beyond hope of repair.
The child was not even able to develop defence mechanisms such as
narcissism.

The end result is an inverted narcissistic personality. The traits of
this personality are primarily evident in relationship contexts. The
child was conditioned by the narcissistic parent to only be entitled to
feel whole, useful, productive, complete when the child augmented or
mirrored to the parent their own sought after narcissistic image. As a
result the child is shaped by this engulfment and cannot feel complete
in any significant adult relationship unless they are with a narcissist.

The Inverted Narcissist in

Relationship with the Narcissist

The inverted narcissist is drawn to significant relationships with
other narcissists in his adulthood. These relationships are usually
spousal primary relationships but can also be friendships with
narcissists outside of the primary love relationship.

In a primary relationship, the inverted narcissist attempts to
re-create the parent-child relationship.

The invert thrives on mirroring to the narcissist his own grandiosity
and in so doing the invert obtains his OWN Narcissistic Supply (the
dependence of the narcissist upon the invert for their Secondary
Narcissistic Supply). The invert must have this form of relationship
with a narcissist in order to feel complete and whole. The invert will
go as far as he needs to ensure that the narcissist is happy, cared
for, properly adored, as he feels is the narcissist's right. The invert
glorifies his narcissist, places him on a pedestal, endures any and all
narcissistic devaluation with calm equanimity, impervious to the overt
slights of the narcissist.

Narcissistic rage is handled deftly by the inverted narcissist. The
invert is exceedingly adept at managing every aspect of his life,
tightly controlling all situations, so as to minimise the potential for
the inevitable narcissistic rages of his narcissist.

The invert wishes to be subsumed by the narcissist. The invert only
feels truly loved and alive in this kind of relationship. The invert is
loth to abandon his relationships with narcissists. The relationship
only ends when the narcissist withdraws completely from the symbiosis.
Once the narcissist has determined that the invert is of no further
use, and withholds all Narcissistic Supply from the invert, only then
does the invert reluctantly move on to another relationship. The invert
is most likely to equate sexual intimacy with engulfment. This can be
easily misread to mean that the invert is himself or herself a somatic
narcissist, but it would be incorrect. The invert can endure years of
minimal sexual contact with their narcissist and still be able to
maintain the self-delusion of intimacy and engulfment. The invert finds
a myriad of other ways to "merge" with the narcissist, becoming
intimately, though only in support roles, involved with the
narcissist's business, career, or any other activity where the invert
can feel that they are needed by the narcissist and indispensable. The
invert is an expert at doling out Narcissistic Supply and even goes as
far as procuring Primary Narcissistic Supply for their narcissist (even
where this means finding another lover for the narcissist, or
participating in group sex with the narcissist). Usually though, the
invert seems most attracted to the cerebral narcissist and finds him
easier to manage than the somatic narcissist. The cerebral narcissist
is disinterested in sex and this makes life considerably easier for the
invert, i.e., the invert is less likely to "lose" their cerebral
narcissist to another primary partner. A somatic narcissist may be
prone to changing partners with greater frequency or wish to have no
partner, preferring to have multiple, casual sexual relationships of no
apparent depth which never last very long.

The invert regards relationships with narcissists as the ONLY true and
legitimate form of primary relationship. The invert is capable of
having primary relationships with non-narcissists. But without
engulfment, the invert feels unneeded, unwanted and emotionally
uninvolved.

Relationships between the

Inverted Narcissist and Non-Narcissists

The inverted narcissist can maintain relationships outside of the
symbiotic primary relationship with a narcissist. But the invert does
not "feel" loved because the non-narcissist is not "engulfing" them.
Thus, the invert tends to devalue their non-narcissistic primary
partner as less than worthy of the inverts' love and attention.

The invert may be able to sustain a relationship with a non-narcissist
by finding other narcissistic symbiotic relationships outside of this
primary relationship. The invert may have a narcissistic friend, to
whom he pays extraordinary attention, ignoring the real needs of the
non-narcissistic partner.

Consequently, the only semi-stable primary relationship between the
invert and the non-narcissist occurs where the non-narcissist is very
easy going, emotionally secure and not needing much from the invert at
all by way of time, energy or commitment to activities requiring the
involvement of both parties. In a relationship with this kind of
narcissist, the invert may become a workaholic or very involved in
outside activities that exclude the non-narcissist spouse.

It appears that the inverted narcissist in a relationship with a
non-narcissist is behaviourally indistinguishable from a true
narcissist. The only important exception is that the invert does not
rage at his non-narcissist partner - he instead withdraws from the
relationship even further. This passive-aggressive reaction has been
noted, though, with narcissists as well.

INVERTED AND OTHER ATYPICAL / PARTIAL (NOS) NARCISSISTS

Inverted Narcissists Talk about Themselves

Competition and (Pathological) Envy

"I have a dynamic that comes up with every single person I get close
to, where I feel extremely competitive toward and envious of the other
person. But I don't ACT competitive, because at the very outset, I see
myself as the loser in the competition. I would never dream of trying
to beat the other person, because I know deep in my heart that they
would win and I would be utterly humiliated. There are fewer things on
earth that feel worse to me than losing a contest and having the other
person gloat over me, especially if they know how much I cared about
not losing. This is one thing that I actually feel violent about. I
guess I tend to project the grandiosity part of the NPD package onto
the other person rather than on a False Ego of my own. So most of the
time I'm stuck in a state of deep resentment and envy toward her. To
me, she's always far more intelligent, likable, popular, talented,
self-confident, emotionally developed, morally good, and attractive
than I am. And I really hate her for that, and feel humiliated by it.
So it's incredibly hard for me to feel happy for this person when she
has a success, because I'm overcome with humiliation about myself. This
has ruined many a close relationship. I tend to get this way about one
person at a time, usually the person who is playing the role of 'my
better half', best friends or lovers/partners. So it's not like I'm
unable to be happy for anyone, ever, or that I envy every person I
meet. I don't get obsessed with how rich or beautiful movie stars are
or anything like that. It only gets projected onto this partner-person,
the person I'm depending on the most in terms of supplies (attention,
reassurance, security, building up my self-esteem, etc.)...

...The really destructive thing that happens is, I see her grandiose
traits as giving her the power to have anything and anyone she wants.
So I feel a basic insecurity, because why should she stay with a loser
like me, when she's obviously so out of my league? So really, what I'm
envious of is the power that all that talent, social ability, beauty,
etc., gives her to have CHOICES - the choice to stay or leave me.
Whereas I am utterly dependent on her. It's this emotional inequality
that I find so humiliating."

"I agree with the inverted narcissist designation - sometimes I've
called myself a 'closet narcissist'.

That is, I've internalised the value system of grandiosity, but have
not applied the grandiose identity to myself.

I believe I SHOULD BE those grandiose things, but at the same time, I
know I'm not and I'm miserable about it. So people don't think of me as
having an inflated Ego - and indeed I don't - but scratch the surface,
and you'll find all these inflated expectations. I mean to say that
perhaps the parents suppressed every manifestation of grandiosity (very
common in early childhood) and of narcissism - so that the defence
mechanism that narcissism is was 'inverted' and internalised in this
unusual form."

"Maybe there aren't two discrete states (NPD vs. 'regular' low
self-esteem) - maybe it's more of a continuum. And maybe it's just the
degree and depth of the problem that distinguishes one from the other.

My therapist describes NPD as 'the inability to love oneself'. As she
defines it, the 'narcissistic wound' is a deep wounding of the sense of
self, the image of oneself. That doesn't mean that other disorders - or
for that matter, other life stressors - can't also cause low
self-esteem. But I think NPD IS low self-esteem...

That's what the disorder is really about - an image of yourself that is
profoundly negative, and the inability to attain a normal and healthy
self-image..."

"Yes, I'm a survivor of child abuse. But remember that not all abuse is
alike. There are different kinds of abuse, and different effects. My
XXX's style of abuse had to do with trying to annihilate me as a
separate person. It also had to do with the need to put all his
negative self-image onto me - to see in me what he hated in himself. So
I got to play the role of the loser that he secretly feared he was. I
was flipped back and forth in those roles - sometimes I'd be a Source
of NS for him, and other times I was the receptacle of all his pain and
rage. Sometimes my successes were used to reflect back on him, to show
off to the rest of the family. Other times, my successes were
threatening to my father, who suddenly feared that I was superior to
him and had to be squelched. I experience emotions that most people I
know don't feel. Or maybe they do feel them, but to far less extreme
intensity. For example, the envy and comparison/competition I feel
toward others. I guess most of us have experienced rivalry, jealousy,
being compared to others. Most of us have felt envy at another's
success. Yet most people I know seem able to overcome those feelings to
some extent, to be able to function normally. In a competition, for
example, they may be driven to do their best so they can win.

For me, the fear of losing and being humiliated is so intense that I
avoid competition completely. I am terrified of showing people that I
care about doing well, because it's so shaming for me if I lose. So I
underachieve and pretend I don't care. Most people I know may envy
another person's good luck or success, but it doesn't prevent them from
also being happy for them and supporting them. But for me, when I'm in
a competitive dynamic with someone, I can't hear about any of their
successes, or compliments they've received, etc. I don't even like to
see the person doing good things, like bringing Thanksgiving leftovers
to the sick old guy next door, because those things make me feel
inferior for not thinking of doing that myself (and not having anyone
in my life that I'd do that for). It's just so incredibly painful for
me to see evidence of the other person's good qualities, because it
immediately brings up my feeling of inferiority. I can't even stand to
date someone, who looks really good, because I'm jealous of their good
looks! So this deep and obsessive envy has destroyed my joy in other
people. All the things about other people that I love and take pleasure
in is a double-edged sword because I also hate them for it, for having
those good qualities (while, presumably, I don't). I don't know - do
you think this is garden-variety low self-esteem? I know plenty of
people who suffer from lack of confidence, from timidity, social
awkwardness, hatred of their body, feeling unlovable, etc. But they
don't have this kind of hostile, corrosive resentment of another person
for being all the wonderful things that they can't be, or aren't
allowed to be, etc. And one thing I hate is when people are judgemental
of me about how I feel, as though I can help it. It's like, 'You
shouldn't be so selfish, you should feel happy for her that she's
successful', etc. They don't understand that I would love to feel those
things, but I can't. I can't stop the incredible pain that explodes in
me when these feelings get triggered, and I often can't even HIDE the
feelings. It's just so overwhelming. I feel so damaged sometimes.
There's more, but that's the crux of it for me, anyway."

Getting Compliments

"I love getting compliments and rewards, and do not react negatively to
them. In some moods, when my self-hate has gotten triggered, I can
sometimes get to places where I'm inconsolable, because I get stuck in
bitterness and self-pity, and so I doubt the sincerity or the
reliability of the good thing that someone is saying to me (to try to
cheer me up or whatever). But, if I'm in a reasonable mood and someone
offers me something good, I'm all too happy to accept it! I don't have
a stake in staying miserable."

The Partiality of the Condition

"I do agree that it's (atypical or inverted narcissism) not MILDER. But
how I see it is that it's PARTIAL. The part that's there is just as
destructive as it is in the typical narcissist. But there are parts
missing from that total, full-blown disorder - and I see that as
healthy, actually. I see it as parts of myself that WEREN'T infected by
the pathology, that are still intact.

In my case, I did not develop the overweening Ego part of the disorder.
So in a sense, what you have with me is the naked pathology, with no
covering: no suaveness, no charm, no charisma, no confidence, no
persuasiveness, but also no excuses, no lies, no justifications for my
feelings. Just the ugly self-hate, for all to see. And the self-hate
part is just as bad as it is with a full-blown narcissist, so again,
it's not milder.

But because I don't have the denial part of the disorder, I have a lot
more insight, a lot more motivation to do something about my problems
(i.e., I 'self-refer' to therapy), and therefore, I think, a lot more
hope of getting better than people whose defence involves totally
denying they even have a problem."

"When my full-blown XXX's pathological envy would get triggered, he
would respond by putting down the person he was envious of - or by
putting down the accomplishment itself, or whatever good stuff the
other person had. He'd trivialise it, or outright contradict it, or
find some way to convince the other person (often me) that the thing
they're feeling good about isn't real, or isn't worthwhile, or is
somehow bad, etc. He could do this because the inflated Ego defence was
fully formed and operating with him.

When MY pathological envy gets triggered, I will be bluntly honest
about it. I'll say something self-pitying, such as: 'You always get the
good stuff, and I get nothing'; 'You're so much better than I'; 'People
like you better - you have good social skills and I'm a jerk'; and so
on. Or I might even get hostile and sarcastic: 'Well, it must be nice
to have so many people worshipping you, isn't it?' I don't try to
convince myself that the other person's success isn't real or
worthwhile, etc. Instead, I'm totally flooded with the pain of feeling
utterly inferior and worthless - and there's no way for me to convince
myself or anyone else otherwise. I'm not saying that the things I say
are pleasant to hear - and it is still manipulative of me to say them,
because the other person's attention is drawn away from their joy and
onto my pain and hostility. And instead of doubting their success's
worth or reality, they feel guilty about it, or about talking about it,
because it hurts me so much. So from the other person's point of view,
maybe it's not any easier to live with a partial narcissist than with a
full-blown, in that their joys and successes lead to pain in both
cases. It's certainly not easier for me, being flooded with rage and
pain instead of being able to hide behind a delusion of grandeur. But
from my therapist's point of view, I'm much better off because I know
I'm unhappy - it's in my face all the time. So I'm motivated to work on
it and change it. And time has borne her words out. Over the past
several years that I've worked on this issue, I have changed a great
deal in how I deal with it. Now when the envy gets triggered, I don't
feel so entwined with the other person - I recognise that it's my OWN
pain getting triggered, not something they are doing to me. And so I
can acknowledge the pain in a more responsible way, taking ownership of
it by saying, 'The jealousy feelings are getting triggered again, and
I'm feeling worthless and inferior. Can you reassure me that I'm not?'
That's a lot better than making some snide, hostile, or self-pitying
comment that puts the other person on the defensive or makes them feel
guilty... I do prefer the term 'partial' because that's what it feels
like to me. It's like a building that's partially built - the house of
narcissism. For me, the structure is there, but not the outside, so you
can see inside the skeleton to all the junk that's inside. It's the
same junk that's inside a full-blown narcissist, but their building is
completed, so you can't see inside. Their building is a fortress, and
it's almost impossible to bring it down.

My defences aren't as strong ... which makes my life more difficult in
some ways because I REALLY feel my pain. But it also means that the
house can be brought down more easily, and the junk inside cleaned
out..."

Thinking about the Past and the World

"I don't usually get rageful about the past. I feel sort of emotionally
cut-off from the past, actually. I remember events very clearly, but
usually can't remember the feelings. When I do remember the feelings,
my reaction is usually one of sadness, and sometimes of relief that I
can get back in touch with my past. But not rage. All my rage seems to
get displaced on the current people in my life."

"...When I see someone being really socially awkward and geeky,
passive-aggressive, indirect and victim-like, it does trigger anger in
me because I identify with that person and I don't want to. I try to
put my negative feelings onto them, to see that person as the jerk, not
me - that's what a narcissist does, after all. But for me it doesn't
completely work because I know, consciously, what I'm trying to do. And
ultimately, I'm not kidding anyone, least of all myself."

Self-Pity and Depression

"More self-pity and depression here - not so much rage. One of the
things that triggers my rage more than anything else is the inability
to control another person, the inability to dominate them and force my
reality on them. I feel impotent, humiliated, forced back on my empty
self. Part of what I'm feeling here is envy: that person who can't be
controlled clearly has a self and I don't, and I just hate them for it.
But it's also a power struggle - I want to get Narcissistic Supply by
being in control and on top and having the other person submissive and
compliant..."

Regretting, Admitting Mistakes

"I regret my behaviour horribly, and I DO admit my feelings. I am also
able, in the aftermath, to have empathy for the feelings of the person
I've hurt, and I'm horribly sad about it, and ashamed of myself. It's
as though I'd been possessed by a demon, acted out all this abusive
horrible stuff, and then, after the departure of the demon, I'm back in
my right mind and it's like, 'What have I DONE???'

I don't mean I'm not responsible for what I did (i.e., a demon made me
do it). But when I'm triggered, I have no empathy - I can only see my
projection onto that person, as a huge threat to me, someone who must
be demolished. But when my head clears, I see that person's pain, hurt,
fear - and I feel terrible. I want to make it up to them. And that
feeling is totally sincere - it's not an act. I'm genuinely sorry for
the pain I've caused the other person."

Rage

"I wouldn't say that my rage comes from repressed self-contempt (mine
is not repressed - I'm totally aware of it). And it's not missing
atonement either, since I do atone. The rage comes from feeling
humiliated, from feeling that the other person has somehow sadistically
and gleefully made me feel inferior, that they're getting off on being
superior, that they're mocking me and ridiculing me, that they have
scorn and contempt for me and find it all very amusing. That - whether
real or imagined (usually imagined) - is what causes my rage."

Pursuing Relationships with Narcissists

"There are some very few of us who actually seek out relationships with
narcissists. We do this with the full knowledge that we are not wanted,
despised even. We persist and pursue no matter the consequences, no
matter the cost.

I am an 'inverted narcissist'. It is because as a child I was
'imprinted/fixated' with a particular pattern involving relationships.
I was engulfed so completely by my father's personality and repressed
so severely by various other factors in my childhood that I simply
didn't develop a recognisable personality. I existed purely as an
extension of my father. I was his genius Wunderkind. He ignored my
mother and poured all his energy and effort into me. I did not develop
full-blown secondary narcissism... I developed into the perfect 'other
half' of the narcissists moulding me. I became the perfect, eager
co-dependent. And this is an imprint, a pattern in my psyche, a way of
(not) relating to the world of relationships by only being able to
truly relate to one person (my father) and then one kind of person -
the narcissist.

He is my perfect lover, my perfect mate, a fit that is so slick and
smooth, so comfortable and effortless, so filled with meaning and
actual feelings - that's the other thing. I cannot feel on my own. I am
incomplete. I can only feel when I am engulfed by another (first it was
my father) and now - well now it has to be a narcissist. Not just any
narcissist either. He must be exceedingly smart, good looking, have
adequate reproductive equipment and some knowledge on how to use it and
that's about it.

When I am engulfed by someone like this I feel completed, I can
actually FEEL. I am whole again. I function as a sibyl, an oracle, an
extension of the narcissist. His fiercest protector, his
purveyor/procurer of NS, the secretary, organiser, manager, etc. I
think you get the picture and this gives me INTENSE PLEASURE.

So the answer to your question: 'Why would anyone want to be with
someone who doesn't want them back?' The short answer is, 'Because
there is no one else remotely worth looking at.'"

Making Amends

"I mostly apologise, and I give the person space to talk about what
hurt them so that (1) they get to express their anger or hurt to me,
and (2) I can understand better and know better how not to hurt them
(if I can avoid it) the next time there's a conflict. Sometimes the
hurt I cause is unintentional - maybe I've been insensitive or
forgetful or something, in which case I feel more certain that I can
avoid repeating the hurtful behaviour, since I didn't want to hurt them
in the first place. If the hurt I caused has to do with my getting my
trigger pulled and going into a rage, then that hurt was quite
deliberate, although at the time I was unable to experience the other
person as vulnerable or capable of being hurt by me. And I do realise
that if that trigger is pulled again, it might happen again. But I also
hope that there'll be a LITTLE TINY window where the memory of the
conversation will come back to me while I'm in my rage, and I'll
remember that the person really IS vulnerable. I hope that by hearing
over and over that the person actually does feel hurt by what I say
while in rages, that I might remember that when I am triggered and
raging. So, mostly I apologise and try to communicate with the other
person. I don't verbally self-flagellate, because that's manipulative.
Not to say I never do that - in fact I've had a dynamic with people
where I verbally put myself down and try to engage the other person
into arguing me out of it.

But if I'm in the middle of apologising to the other person for hurting
them, then I feel like this is their moment, and I don't want to turn
the focus toward getting them to try to make me feel better. I will
talk about myself, but only in an attempt to communicate, so that we
can understand each other better. I might say, 'I got triggered about
such-and-such, and you seemed so invulnerable that it enraged me', etc.
- and the other person might react with, 'But I was feeling vulnerable,
I just couldn't show it', etc. - and we'll go back and forth like that.
So it's not like I don't think my feelings count, and I do want the
other person to UNDERSTAND my feelings, but I don't want to put the
other person in the role of taking care of my feelings in that moment,
because they have just been hurt by me and I'm trying to make it up to
them, not squeeze more stuff OUT of them..."

"So when I've been a real jerk to someone, I want them to feel like
it's OK to be pissed off at me, and I want them to know that I am
interested in and focused on how they feel, not just on how I feel. As
for gifts - I used to do that, but eventually I came to feel that that
was manipulative, too, that it muddled things because then the other
person would feel like they couldn't be angry anymore, since after all,
I've just brought them this nice gift. I also feel that in general,
gift-giving is a sweet and tender thing to do, and I don't want to
sully that tenderness by associating it with the hurt that comes from
abusive behaviour."

Why Narcissists?

"I am BUILT this way. I may have overstated it by saying that I have
'no choice' because, in fact I do.

The choice is - live in an emotionally deadened monochrome world where
I can reasonably interact with normal people OR I can choose to be with
a narcissist in which case my world is Technicolor, emotionally
satisfying, alive and wondrous (also can be turbulent and a real roller
coaster ride for the unprepared, not to mention incredibly damaging for
people who are not inverted narcissists and who fall into relationships
with narcissists). As I have walked on both sides of the street, and
because I have developed coping mechanisms that protect me really quite
well, I can reasonably safely engage in a primary, intimate
relationship with a narcissist without getting hurt by it.

The real WHY of it all is that I learned, as a young child, that being
'eaten alive' by a narcissist parent, to the point where your existence
is but an extension of his own, was how all relationships ought to
work. It is a psychological imprint - my 'love map', it is what feels
right to me intrinsically. A pattern of living - I don't know how else
to describe it so you and others will understand how very natural and
normal this is for me. It is not the torturous existence that most of
the survivors of narcissism are recounting on this list.

My experiences with narcissists, to me, ARE NORMAL for me. Comfortable
like an old pair of slippers that fit perfectly. I don't expect many
people to attempt to do this, to 'make themselves into' this kind of
person. I don't think anyone could, if they tried.

It is my need to be engulfed and merged that drives me to these
relationships and when I get those needs met I feel more normal, better
about myself. I am the outer extension of the narcissist. In many ways
I am a vanguard, a public two-way warning system, fiercely defending my
narcissist from harm, and fiercely loyal to him, catering to his every
need in order to protect his fragile existence. These are the dynamics
of my particular version of engulfment. I don't need anyone to take
care of me. I need only to be needed in this very particular way, by a
narcissist who inevitably possesses the ability to engulf in a way that
normal, fully realised adults cannot. It is somewhat paradoxical - I
feel freer and more independent with a narcissist than without one. I
achieve more in my life when I am in this form of relationship. I try
harder, work harder, am more creative, think better of myself, excel in
most every aspect of my life."

"...I go ahead and cater to him and pretend that his words don't hurt,
and later, I engage in an internal fight with myself for being so
damned submissive. It's a constant battle and I can't seem to decide
which voice in my head I should listen to... I feel like a fool, yet, I
would rather be a fool with him than a lonely, well-rounded woman
without him. I've often said that the only way that we can stay
together is because we feed off of each other. I give him everything he
needs and he takes it. Seeing him happy and pleased is what gives me
pleasure. I feel very successful then."

Partial NPD

"I do think it's uncommon for girls to develop these patterns, as they
are usually trained to be self-effacing. I certainly was!

However, I have a lot of the very same underlying patterns that
full-blown, obnoxiously egotistical NP's have, but I am not egotistical
because I didn't develop the pattern of inflated Ego and grandiosity.
All the rest of it is there, though: fragile Ego, lack of a centre or
self, super-sensitive to criticism and rejections, pathological,
obsessive envy, comparisons and competitive attitudes toward others, a
belief that everyone in the world is either superior or inferior to me,
and so on.

Sometimes I kind of wish I had developed the inflated Ego of a complete
NP, because then I would at least be able to hide from all the pain I
feel. But at the same time, I'm glad I didn't, because those people
have a much lower chance of recovery - how can they recover if they
don't acknowledge anything is wrong? Whereas it's pretty clear to me I
have problems, and I've spent my life working on them and trying to
change myself and heal."

Narcissist-Non Narcissist

And Narcissist-Inverted Narcissist Couples

"Can a N and a non-N ever maintain a long lasting marriage? It would
seem that a non-N would have too much self-esteem to lend himself to a
lifetime of catering and pandering to an N's unending need for unearned
adoration and glory. I, as a non-N... got tired of these people and
their unremitting attempts to drain my psyche within a relatively short
period of time and abandoned them as soon as I realised what I was
dealing with to preserve my own sanity."

"It depends on the non-narcissist, really. Narcissism is a RIGID,
systemic pattern of responses. It is so all-pervasive and
all-encompassing that it is a PERSONALITY disorder. If the
non-narcissist is codependent, for instance, then the narcissist is a
perfect match for him and the union will last..."

"You have to pimp for the narcissist, intellectually, and sexually. If
your narcissist is somatic, you are much better off lining up the sex
partners than leaving it to him. Intellectual pimping is more varied.
You can think of wonderful things and then subtly string out the idea,
in the most delicate of packages and watch the narcissist cogitate
their way to 'their' brilliant discovery whilst you bask in the glow of
their perfection and success...

The point of this entire exercise is to assure YOUR supply, which is
the narcissist himself, not to punish yourself by giving away a great
idea or abase yourself because, of course, YOU are not worthy of having
such a great idea on your own - but who knows, it may seem that way to
the inverted narcissist. It really depends on how self-aware the
inverted is."

"The only rejection you need to fear is the possibility of losing the
narcissist and if one is doing everything else right, this is very
unlikely to happen! So by 'emotionally independent' I am talking about
being self-assured, doing your own thing, having a life, feeling strong
and good about yourself, getting emotional sustenance from other
people. I mean, let's face it, a drug is a drug is a habit. Habits just
are, and what they ARE NOT are the be all and end all of love,
commitment and serene symmetrical, balanced emotional perfection that
is the ideal of the romanticised 'love-for-a-lifetime' all-American
relationship dream."

"(I am) terribly turned on by narcissists. The most exciting moments of
my life in every venue have been with narcissists. It is as if living
and loving with normal people is a grey thing by comparison, not
fuelled by sufficient adrenaline. I feel like a junkie, now, that I no
longer permit myself the giddy pleasure of the RUSH I used to know when
I was deeply and hopelessly involved with an N. I am like a
lotus-eater. And I always felt guilty about this and also sorry that I
ever succumbed that first time to my first narcissist lover."

"I am exactly this way and I feel exactly as you do, that the world is
a sepia motion picture but when I am intimately involved with a
narcissist, it breaks out into three-dimensional Technicolor and I can
see and feel in ways that are not available to me otherwise. In my case
I developed this (inverted narcissism) as a result of being the
favourite of my father who so completely absorbed me into his
personality that I was not able to develop a sense of separation. So I
am stuck in this personality matrix of needing to be engulfed, adored
by and completely taken over by a narcissist in my life. In turn, I
worship, defend, regulate and procure Narcissistic Supply for my
narcissist. It is like the mould and the moulded."

"In my case, I realise that while I can't stop loving my current
narcissist, it isn't necessary for me to avoid as long as I can
understand. In my way of looking at it, he is deserving of love, and
since I can give him love without it hurting me, then as long as he
needs it, he shall have it."

"My personal theory is that dogmatic religious culture is a retarding
influence on the growth and maturation of those heavily involved - more
and more autonomy (and hence personal responsibility) seems to be
blithely sacrificed to the group mind/spirit. It is as though the
church members become one personality and that personality is
narcissistic and the individual just folds under the weight of that
kind of group pressure - particularly if you are a child."

"If I displayed behaviour that made my XXX look good to others, I was
insipidly overvalued. When I dared be something other than who she
wanted me to be, the sarcastic criticism and total devaluation was
unbelievable. So, I learned to be all things to all people. I get a
heavenly high from surrendering my power to a narcissist, to catering
to them, in having them overvalue and need me, and it is the only time
that I truly feel alive..."

"We have very little choice in all of this. We are as vacant and warped
as the narcissist. XXX is wont to say, 'I don't HAVE a personality
disorder, I AM a personality disorder.' It defines who we are and how
we will respond. You will always and ONLY have real feelings when you
are with a narcissist. It is your love map, it is the programming
within your psyche. Does it need to control your behaviour? Not
necessarily. Knowing what you are can at least give you the opportunity
to forecast the effect of an action before you take it. So, loveless
black and white may be the very healthiest thing for you for the
foreseeable future. I tend to think of these episodes with narcissists
as being cyclic. You will likely need to cut loose for a while when
your child is older.

DO NOT feel ashamed please! Should a physically handicapped person feel
ashamed of their handicap? No and neither should we. The trouble with
us is that we are fooled into thinking that these relationships are
'guilty pleasures'. They feel so very good for a time but they are more
akin to addiction satisfaction rather than being the 'right match' or
an 'appropriate relationship'. I am still very conflicted myself about
this. I wrote a few months ago that it was like having a caged very
dangerous animal inside of me. When I get near narcissists, the animal
smells its own kind and it wants out. I very carefully 'micro-manage'
my life. This means that I daily do fairly regular reality checks and
keep a very tight reign on my self and my behaviours. I am also
obsessive-compulsive."

"I feel as though I'm constantly on an emotional roller coaster. I may
wake up in a good mood, but if my N partner does or says something,
which is hurtful to me, my mood changes immediately. I now feel sad,
empty, afraid. All I want to do at this point is anything that will
make him say something NICE to me.

Once he does, I'm back on top of the world. This pattern of mood
changes, or whatever you may call them, can take place several times a
day. Each and every day. I've gotten to the point where I'm not sure
that I can trust myself to feel any one way, because I know that I have
no control over myself. He has the control. It's scary, yet I've sort
of come to depend on him determining how I am going to feel."

"When I was first involved with my cerebral narcissist I was like this
but after awhile I just learned to become more emotionally distant (the
ups and downs were just too much) and find emotional gratification with
other people, mostly girl friends and one of two male friends. I make a
point of saying ... that the invert must be or become emotionally and
financially independent (if you don't do this he will eat you up and
when he has finished with you and you are nothing but a husk, you will
be expelled from his life in one big vomit). It is really important for
you to start to take responsibility for your own emotional wellness
without regard to how he treats you. Remember that the narcissist has
the emotional maturity of a two-year old! Don't expect much in the way
of emotional depth or support in your relationship - he simply is not
capable of anything that sophisticated."

(*) Alice Ratzlaff, graduate of Queen's University School of Law,
Kingston, Ontario, Canada practices child protection defence law in
British Columbia, Canada. Ms. Ratzlaff was a professional 'cellist
before entering law school. Ms. Ratzlaff has two sons.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 53

The Selfish Gene

The Genetic Underpinnings of Narcissism

Question: Is pathological narcissism the outcome of inherited traits -
or the sad result of abusive and traumatizing upbringing? Or, maybe it
is the confluence of both? It is a common occurrence, after all, that,
in the same family, with the same set of parents and an identical
emotional environment - some siblings grow to be malignant narcissists,
while others are perfectly "normal". Surely, this indicates a
predisposition of some people to developing narcissism, a part of one's
genetic heritage.

Answer: This vigorous debate may be the offshoot of obfuscating
semantics.

When we are born, we are not much more than the sum of our genes and
their manifestations. Our brain - a physical object - is the residence
of mental health and its disorders. Mental illness cannot be explained
without resorting to the body and, especially, to the brain. And our
brain cannot be contemplated without considering our genes. Thus, any
explanation of our mental life that leaves out our hereditary makeup
and our neurophysiology is lacking. Such lacking theories are nothing
but literary narratives. Psychoanalysis, for instance, is often accused
of being divorced from corporeal reality.

Our genetic baggage makes us resemble a personal computer. We are an
all-purpose, universal, machine. Subject to the right programming
(conditioning, socialisation, education, upbringing) - we can turn out
to be anything and everything.

A computer can imitate any other kind of discrete machine, given the
right software. It can play music, screen movies, calculate, print,
paint. Compare this to a television set - it is constructed and
expected to do one, and only one, thing. It has a single purpose and a
unitary function. We, humans, are more like computers than like
television sets.

True, single genes rarely account for any behaviour or trait. An array
of coordinated genes is required to explain even the minutest human
phenomenon. "Discoveries" of a "gambling gene" here and an "aggression
gene" there are derided by the more serious and less publicity-prone
scholars. Yet, it would seem that even complex behaviours such as risk
taking, reckless driving, and compulsive shopping have genetic
underpinnings.

What about the Narcissistic Personality Disorder?

It would seem reasonable to assume - though, at this stage, there is
not a shred of proof - that the narcissist is born with a propensity to
develop narcissistic defences. These are triggered by abuse or trauma
during the formative years in infancy or during early adolescence [see
FAQ 48]. By "abuse" I am referring to a spectrum of behaviours which
objectifies the child and treats it as an extension of the caregiver
(parent) or an instrument. Dotting and smothering are as much abuse as
beating and starving. And abuse can be dished out by peers as well as
by adult role models.

Still, I would have to attribute the development of NPD mostly to
nurture. The Narcissistic Personality Disorder is an extremely complex
battery of phenomena: behaviour patterns, cognitions, emotions,
conditioning, and so on. NPD is a PERSONALITY disordered and even the
most ardent proponents of the school of genetics do not attribute the
development of the whole personality to genes.

From "The Interrupted Self" [http://samvak.tripod.com/sacks.html]:

"'Organic' and 'mental' disorders (a dubious distinction at best) have
many characteristics in common (confabulation, antisocial behaviour,
emotional absence or flatness, indifference, psychotic episodes and so
on)."

From "On Dis-ease" [http://samvak.tripod.com/disease.html]:

"Moreover, the distinction between the psychic and the physical is
hotly disputed, philosophically. The psychophysical problem is as
intractable today as it ever was (if not more so). It is beyond doubt
that the physical affects the mental and the other way around. This is
what disciplines like psychiatry are all about. The ability to control
'autonomous' bodily functions (such as heartbeat) and mental reactions
to pathogens of the brain are proof of the artificialness of this
distinction.

It is a result of the reductionist view of nature as divisible and
summable. The sum of the parts, alas, is not always the whole and there
is no such thing as an infinite set of the rules of nature, only an
asymptotic approximation of it. The distinction between the patient and
the outside world is superfluous and wrong. The patient AND his
environment are ONE and the same. Disease is a perturbation in the
operation and management of the complex ecosystem known as
patient-world. Humans absorb their environment and feed it in equal
measures. This on-going interaction IS the patient. We cannot exist
without the intake of water, air, visual stimuli and food. Our
environment is defined by our actions and output, physical and mental.

Thus, one must question the classical differentiation between
'internal' and 'external'. Some illnesses are considered 'endogenic'
(=generated from the inside). Natural, 'internal', causes - a heart
defect, a biochemical imbalance, a genetic mutation, a metabolic
process gone awry - cause disease. Aging and deformities also belong in
this category.

In contrast, problems of nurturance and environment - early childhood
abuse, for instance, or malnutrition - are 'external' and so are the
'classical' pathogens (germs and viruses) and accidents.

But this, again, is a counter-productive approach. Exogenic and
Endogenic pathogenesis is inseparable. Mental states increase or
decrease the susceptibility to externally induced disease. Talk therapy
or abuse (external events) alter the biochemical balance of the brain.

The inside constantly interacts with the outside and is so intertwined
with it that all distinctions between them are artificial and
misleading. The best example is, of course, medication: it is an
external agent, it influences internal processes and it has a very
strong mental correlate (=its efficacy is influenced by mental factors
as in the placebo effect).

The very nature of dysfunction and sickness is highly culture-dependent.

Societal parameters dictate right and wrong in health (especially
mental health). It is all a matter of statistics. Certain diseases are
accepted in certain parts of the world as a fact of life or even a sign
of distinction (e.g., the paranoid schizophrenic as chosen by the
gods). If there is no dis-ease there is no disease. That the physical
or mental state of a person CAN be different - does not imply that it
MUST be different or even that it is desirable that it should be
different. In an over-populated world, sterility might be the desirable
thing - or even the occasional epidemic. There is no such thing as
ABSOLUTE dysfunction. The body and the mind ALWAYS function. They adapt
themselves to their environment and if the latter changes - they change.

Personality disorders are the best possible responses to abuse. Cancer
may be the best possible response to carcinogens. Aging and death are
definitely the best possible response to over-population. Perhaps the
point of view of the single patient is incommensurate with the point of
view of his species - but this should not serve to obscure the issues
and derail rational debate.

As a result, it is logical to introduce the notion of 'positive
aberration'. Certain hyper- or hypo- functioning can yield positive
results and prove to be adaptive. The difference between positive and
negative aberrations can never be 'objective'. Nature is
morally-neutral and embodies no 'values' or 'preferences'. It simply
exists. WE, humans, introduce our value systems, prejudices and
priorities into our activities, science included. It is better to be
healthy, we say, because we feel better when we are healthy.
Circularity aside - this is the only criterion that we can reasonably
employ. If the patient feels good - it is not a disease, even if we all
think it is. If the patient feels bad, ego-dystonic, unable to function
- it is a disease, even when we all think it isn't. Needless to say
that I am referring to that mythical creature, the fully informed
patient. If someone is sick and knows no better (has never been
healthy) - then his decision should be respected only after he is given
the chance to experience health.

All the attempts to introduce 'objective' yardsticks of health are
plagued and philosophically contaminated by the insertion of values,
preferences and priorities into the formula - or by subjecting the
formula to them altogether. One such attempt is to define health as 'an
increase in order or efficiency of processes' as contrasted with
illness which is 'a decrease in order (=increase of entropy) and in the
efficiency of processes'. While being factually disputable, this dyad
also suffers from a series of implicit value-judgements. For instance,
why should we prefer life over death? Order to entropy? Efficiency to
inefficiency?"

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 63

The Weapon of Language

Question: My wife was diagnosed as a narcissist. She twists everything
and turns it against me. She distorts everything I ever said, ignores
the context, and even invent her own endings. It is impossible to have
a meaningful conversation with her because she won't commit to anything
she says.

Answer: In the narcissist's surrealistic world, even language is
pathologized. It mutates into a weapon of self-defence, a verbal
fortification, a medium without a message, replacing words with
duplicitous and ambiguous vocables.

Narcissists (and, often, by contagion, their unfortunate victims) don't
talk, or communicate. They fend off. They hide and evade and avoid and
disguise. In their planet of capricious and arbitrary unpredictability,
of shifting semiotic and semantic dunes - they perfect the ability to
say nothing in lengthy, Castro-like speeches.

The ensuing convoluted sentences are arabesques of meaninglessness,
acrobatics of evasion, lack of commitment elevated to an ideology. The
narcissist prefers to wait and see and see what waiting brings. It is
the postponement of the inevitable that leads to the inevitability of
postponement as a strategy of survival.

It is often impossible to really understand a narcissist. The evasive
syntax fast deteriorates into ever more labyrinthine structures. The
grammar tortured to produce the verbal Doppler shifts essential to
disguise the source of the information, its distance from reality, the
speed of its degeneration into rigid "official" versions.

Buried under the lush flora and fauna of idioms without an end, the
language erupts, like some exotic rash, an autoimmune reaction to its
infection and contamination. Like vile weeds it spread throughout,
strangling with absent minded persistence the ability to understand, to
feel, to agree, to disagree and to debate, to present arguments, to
compare notes, to learn and to teach.

Narcissists, therefore, never talk to others - rather, they talk at
others, or lecture them. They exchange subtexts, camouflage-wrapped by
elaborate, florid, texts. They read between the lines, spawning a
multitude of private languages, prejudices, superstitions, conspiracy
theories, rumours, phobias and hysterias. Theirs is a solipsistic world
- where communication is permitted only with oneself and the aim of
language is to throw others off the scent or to obtain Narcissistic
Supply.

This has profound implications. Communication through unequivocal,
unambiguous, information-rich symbol systems is such an integral and
crucial part of our world - that its absence is not postulated even in
the remotest galaxies which grace the skies of science fiction. In this
sense, narcissists are nothing short of aliens. It is not that they
employ a different language, a code to be deciphered by a new Freud. It
is also not the outcome of upbringing or socio-cultural background.

It is the fact that language is put by narcissists to a different use -
not to communicate but to obscure, not to share but to abstain, not to
learn but to defend and resist, not to teach but to preserve ever less
tenable monopolies, to disagree without incurring wrath, to criticize
without commitment, to agree without appearing to do so. Thus, an
"agreement" with a narcissist is a vague expression of intent at a
given moment - rather than the clear listing of long-term, iron-cast
and mutual commitments.

The rules that govern the narcissist's universe are loopholed
incomprehensibles, open to an exegesis so wide and so
self-contradictory that it renders them meaningless. The narcissist
often hangs himself by his own verbose Gordic knots, having stumbled
through a minefield of logical fallacies and endured self-inflicted
inconsistencies. Unfinished sentences hover in the air, like vapour
above a semantic swamp.

In the case of the inverted narcissist, who was suppressed and abused
by overbearing caregivers, there is the strong urge not to offend.
Intimacy and inter-dependence are great. Parental or peer pressures are
irresistible and result in conformity and self-deprecation. Aggressive
tendencies, strongly repressed in the social pressure cooker, teem
under the veneer of forced civility and violent politeness.
Constructive ambiguity, a non-committal "everyone is good and right",
an atavistic variant of moral relativism and tolerance bred of fear and
of contempt - are all at the service of this eternal vigilance against
aggressive drives, at the disposal of a never ending peacekeeping
mission.

With the classic narcissist, language is used cruelly and ruthlessly to
ensnare one's enemies, to saw confusion and panic, to move others to
emulate the narcissist ("projective identification"), to leave the
listeners in doubt, in hesitation, in paralysis, to gain control, or to
punish. Language is enslaved and forced to lie. The language is
appropriated and expropriated. It is considered to be a weapon, an
asset, a piece of lethal property, a traitorous mistress to be gang
raped into submission.

With cerebral narcissists, language is a lover. The infatuation with
its very sound leads to a pyrotechnic type of speech which sacrifices
its meaning to its music. Its speakers pay more attention to the
composition than to the content. They are swept by it, intoxicated by
its perfection, inebriated by the spiralling complexity of its forms.
Here, language is an inflammatory process. It attacks the very tissues
of the narcissist's relationships with artistic fierceness. It invades
the healthy cells of reason and logic, of cool headed argumentation and
level headed debate.

Language is a leading indicator of the psychological and institutional
health of social units, such as the family, or the workplace. Social
capital can often be measured in cognitive (hence, verbal-lingual)
terms. To monitor the level of comprehensibility and lucidity of texts
is to study the degree of sanity of family members, co-workers,
friends, spouses, mates, and colleagues. There can exist no hale
society without unambiguous speech, without clear communications,
without the traffic of idioms and content that is an inseparable part
of every social contract. Our language determines how we perceive our
world. It IS our mind and our consciousness. The narcissist, in this
respect, is a great social menace.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 70

Collective Narcissism

Narcissism, Culture and Society

Question: I believe that (ethnic group deleted) are all narcissists.
Can it be that a group of people are all narcissists or am I your
average bigot and racist?

Answer: In their book "Personality Disorders in Modern Life", Theodore
Millon and Roger Davis state, as a matter of fact, that pathological
narcissism was the preserve of "the royal and the wealthy" and that it
"seems to have gained prominence only in the late twentieth century".
Narcissism, according to them, may be associated with "higher levels of
Maslow's hierarchy of needs ... Individuals in less advantaged nations
... are too busy trying (to survive) ... to be arrogant and grandiose".

They - like Lasch before them - attribute pathological narcissism to "a
society that stresses individualism and self-gratification at the
expense of community, namely the United States." They assert that the
disorder is more prevalent among certain professions with "star power"
or respect. "In an individualistic culture, the narcissist is 'God's
gift to the world'. In a collectivist society, the narcissist is 'God's
gift to the collective'."

Millon quotes Warren and Caponi's "The Role of Culture in the
Development of Narcissistic Personality Disorders in America, Japan and
Denmark":

"Individualistic narcissistic structures of self-regard (in
individualistic societies) ... are rather self-contained and
independent ... (In collectivist cultures) narcissistic configurations
of the we-self ... denote self-esteem derived from strong
identification with the reputation and honour of the family, groups,
and others in hierarchical relationships."

Having lived in the last 20 years 12 countries in 4 continents - from
the impoverished to the affluent, with individualistic and collectivist
societies - I know that Millon and Davis are wrong. Theirs is, indeed,
the quintessential American point of view which lacks an intimate
knowledge of other parts of the world. Millon even wrongly claims that
the DSM's international equivalent, the ICD, does not include the
narcissistic personality disorder (it does).

Pathological narcissism is a ubiquitous phenomenon because every human
being - regardless of the nature of his society and culture - develops
healthy narcissism early in life. Healthy narcissism is rendered
pathological by abuse - and abuse, alas, is a universal human
behaviour. By "abuse" we mean any refusal to acknowledge the emerging
boundaries of the individual - smothering, doting, and excessive
expectations - are as abusive as beating and incest.

There are malignant narcissists among subsistence farmers in Africa,
nomads in the Sinai desert, day labourers in East Europe, and
intellectuals and socialites in Manhattan. Malignant narcissism is
all-pervasive and independent of culture and society.

It is true, though, that the WAY pathological narcissism manifests and
is experienced is dependent on the particulars of societies and
cultures. In some cultures, it is encouraged, in others suppressed. In
some societies it is channelled against minorities - in others it is
tainted with paranoia. In collectivist societies, it may be projected
onto the collective, in individualistic societies, it is an
individual's trait.

Yet, can families, organizations, ethnic groups, churches, and even
whole nations be safely described as "narcissistic" or "pathologically
self-absorbed"? Wouldn't such generalisations be a trifle racist and
more than a trifle wrong? The answer is: it depends.

Human collectives - states, firms, households, institutions, political
parties, cliques, bands - acquire a life and a character all their own.
The longer the association or affiliation of the members, the more
cohesive and conformist the inner dynamics of the group, the more
persecutory or numerous its enemies, the more intensive the physical
and emotional experiences of the individuals it is comprised of, the
stronger the bonds of locale, language, and history - the more rigorous
might an assertion of a common pathology be.

Such an all-pervasive and extensive pathology manifests itself in the
behaviour of each and every member. It is a defining - though often
implicit or underlying - mental structure. It has explanatory and
predictive powers. It is recurrent and invariable - a pattern of
conduct melded with distorted cognition and stunted emotions. And it is
often vehemently denied.

A possible DSM-like list of criteria for narcissistic organizations or
groups:

An all-pervasive pattern of grandiosity (in fantasy or behaviour), need
for admiration or adulation and lack of empathy, usually beginning at
the group's early history and present in various contexts. Persecution
and abuse are often the causes - or at least the antecedents - of the
pathology.

Five (or more) of the following criteria must be met:

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group -
feel grandiose and self-important (e.g., they exaggerate the group's
achievements and talents to the point of lying, demand to be recognized
as superior - simply for belonging to the group and without
commensurate achievement).

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group - are
obsessed with group fantasies of unlimited success, fame, fearsome
power or omnipotence, unequalled brilliance, bodily beauty or
performance, or ideal, everlasting, all-conquering ideals or political
theories.

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group - are
firmly convinced that the group is unique and, being special, can only
be understood by, should only be treated by, or associate with, other
special or unique, or high-status groups (or institutions).

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group -
require excessive admiration, adulation, attention and affirmation -
or, failing that, wish to be feared and to be notorious (Narcissistic
Supply).

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group -
feel entitled. They expect unreasonable or special and favourable
priority treatment. They demand automatic and full compliance with
expectations. They rarely accept responsibility for their actions
("alloplastic defences"). This often leads to anti-social behaviour,
cover-ups, and criminal activities on a mass scale.

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group - are
"interpersonally exploitative", i.e., use others to achieve their own
ends. This often leads to anti-social behaviour, cover-ups, and
criminal activities on a mass scale.

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group - are
devoid of empathy. They are unable or unwilling to identify with or
acknowledge the feelings and needs of other groups. This often leads to
anti-social behaviour, cover-ups, and criminal activities on a mass
scale.

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group - are
constantly envious of others or believes that they feel the same about
them. This often leads to anti-social behaviour, cover-ups, and
criminal activities on a mass scale.

_        The group as a whole, or members of the group - acting as such
and by virtue of their association and affiliation with the group - are
arrogant and sport haughty behaviours or attitudes coupled with rage
when frustrated, contradicted, punished, limited, or confronted. This
often leads to anti-social behaviour, cover-ups, and criminal
activities on a mass scale.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTION # 89

The Spouse/Mate/Partner of the Narcissist

Question: What kind of a spouse/mate/partner is likely to be attracted
to a narcissist?

Answer:

The Victims

On the face of it, there is no (emotional) partner or mate, who
typically "binds" with a narcissist. They come in all shapes and sizes.
The initial phases of attraction, infatuation and falling in love are
pretty normal. The narcissist puts on his best face - the other party
is blinded by budding love. A natural selection process occurs only
much later, as the relationship develops and is put to the test.

Living with a narcissist can be exhilarating, is always onerous, often
harrowing. Surviving a relationship with a narcissist indicates,
therefore, the parameters of the personality of the survivor. She (or,
more rarely, he) is moulded by the relationship into The Typical
Narcissistic Mate/Partner/Spouse.

First and foremost, the narcissist's partner must have a deficient or a
distorted grasp of her self and of reality. Otherwise, she (or he) is
bound to abandon the narcissist's ship early on. The cognitive
distortion is likely to consist of belittling and demeaning herself -
while aggrandising and adoring the narcissist. The partner is, thus,
placing himself in the position of the eternal victim: undeserving,
punishable, a scapegoat. Sometimes, it is very important to the partner
to appear moral, sacrificial and victimised.

At other times, she is not even aware of this predicament. The
narcissist is perceived by the partner to be a person in the position
to demand these sacrifices from her partner, being superior in many
ways (intellectually, emotionally, morally, financially).

The status of professional victim sits well with the partner's tendency
to punish herself, namely: with her masochistic streak. The tormented
life with the narcissist is, as far as the partner is aware, a just
punitive measure.

In this respect, the partner is the mirror image of the narcissist. By
maintaining a symbiotic relationship with him, by being totally
dependent upon the source of masochistic supply (which the narcissist
most reliably constitutes and most amply provides) - the partner
enhances certain traits and encourages certain behaviours, which are at
the very core of narcissism.

The narcissist is never whole without an adoring, submissive,
available, self-denigrating partner. His very sense of superiority,
indeed his False Self, depends on it. His sadistic Superego switches
its attentions from the narcissist (in whom it often provokes suicidal
ideation) to the partner, thus finally obtaining an alternative source
of sadistic satisfaction.

It is through self-denial that the partner survives. She denies her
wishes, hopes, dreams, aspirations, sexual, psychological and material
needs, and much else besides. She perceives her needs as threatening
because they might engender the wrath of the narcissist's God-like
supreme figure. The narcissist is rendered in her eyes even more
superior through and because of this self-denial. Self-denial
undertaken to facilitate and ease the life of a "great man" is more
palatable. The "greater" the man (=the narcissist), the easier it is
for the partner to ignore her own self, to dwindle, to degenerate, to
turn into an appendix of the narcissist and, finally, to become nothing
but an extension, to merge with the narcissist to the point of oblivion
and of dim memories of one's self.

The two collaborate in this macabre dance. The narcissist is formed by
his partner inasmuch as he forms her. Submission breeds superiority and
masochism breeds sadism. The relationships are characterised by rampant
emergentism: roles are allocated almost from the start and any
deviation meets with an aggressive, even violent reaction.

The predominant state of the partner's mind is utter confusion. Even
the most basic relationships - with husband, children, or parents -
remain bafflingly obscured by the giant shadow cast by the intensive
interaction with the narcissist.

A suspension of judgement is part and parcel of a suspension of
individuality, which is both a prerequisite to and the result of living
with a narcissist. The partner no longer knows what is true and right
and what is wrong and forbidden.

The narcissist recreates for the partner the sort of emotional ambience
that led to his own formation in the first place: capriciousness,
fickleness, arbitrariness, emotional (and physical or sexual)
abandonment. The world becomes uncertain and frightening and the
partner has only one thing to cling to: the narcissist.

And cling she does. If there is anything which can safely be said about
those who emotionally team up with narcissists, it is that they are
overtly and overly dependent.

The partner doesn't know what to do - and this is only too natural in
the mayhem that is the relationship with the narcissist. But the
typical partner also does not know what she wants and, to a large
extent, who she is and what she wants to become.

These unanswered questions hamper the partner's ability to gauge
reality, evaluate and appraise it for what it is. Her primordial sin is
that she fell in love with an image, not with a real person. It is the
voiding of the image that is mourned when the relationship ends.

The break-up of a relationship with a narcissist is, therefore, very
emotionally charged. It is the culmination of a long chain of
humiliations and of subjugation. It is the rebellion of the functioning
and healthy parts of the partner's personality against the tyranny of
the narcissist.

The partner is liable to have totally misread and misinterpreted the
whole interaction (I hesitate to call it a relationship). This lack of
proper interface with reality might be (erroneously) labelled
"pathological".

Why is it that the partner seeks to prolong her pain? What is the
source and purpose of this masochistic streak? Upon the break-up of the
relationship, the partner (and the narcissist) engage in a tortuous and
drawn out post mortem. But the question who really did what to whom
(and even why) is irrelevant. What is relevant is to stop mourning
oneself (this is what the parties are really mourning), start smiling
again and love in a less subservient, hopeless, and pain-inflicting
manner.

The Abuse

Abuse is an integral, inseparable part of the Narcissistic Personality
Disorder.

The narcissist idealises and then DEVALUES and discards the object of
his initial idealisation. This abrupt, heartless devaluation IS abuse.
ALL narcissists idealise and then devalue. This is THE core of
narcissistic behaviour. The narcissist exploits, lies, insults,
demeans, ignores (the "silent treatment"), manipulates, controls. All
these are forms of abuse.

There are a million ways to abuse. To love too much is to abuse. It is
tantamount to treating someone as one's extension, an object, or an
instrument of gratification. To be over-protective, not to respect
privacy, to be brutally honest, with a morbid sense of humour, or
consistently tactless - is to abuse. To expect too much, to denigrate,
to ignore - are all modes of abuse. There is physical abuse, verbal
abuse, psychological abuse, sexual abuse. The list is long.

Narcissists are masters of abusing surreptitiously. They are "stealth
abusers". You have to actually live with one in order to witness the
abuse.

There are three important categories of abuse:

1.        Overt Abuse - The open and explicit abuse of another person.
Threatening, coercing, beating, lying, berating, demeaning, chastising,
insulting, humiliating, exploiting, ignoring ("silent treatment"),
devaluing, unceremoniously discarding, verbal abuse, physical abuse and
sexual abuse are all forms of overt abuse.

2.        Covert or Controlling Abuse - Narcissism is almost entirely
about control. It is a primitive and immature reaction to the
circumstances of a llife in which the narcissist (usually in his
childhood) was rendered helpless. It is about re-asserting one's
identity, re-establishing predictability, mastering the environment -
human and physical.

3.        The bulk of narcissistic behaviours can be traced to this
panicky reaction to the remote potential for loss of control.
Narcissists are hypochondriacs (and difficult patients) because they
are afraid to lose control over their body, its looks and its proper
functioning. They are obsessive-compulsive in their efforts to subdue
their physical habitat and render it foreseeable. They stalk people and
harass them as a means of "being in touch" - another form of
narcissistic control.

But why the panic?

The narcissist is a solipsist. To him, nothing exists except himself.
Meaningful others are his extensions, assimilated by him, internal
objects - not external ones. Thus, losing control of a significant
other - is equivalent losing the use of a limb, or of one's brain. It
is terrifying.

Independent or disobedient people evoke in the narcissist the
realisation that something is wrong with his worldview, that he is not
the centre of the world or its cause and that he cannot control what,
to him, are internal representations.

To the narcissist, losing control means going insane. Because other
people are mere elements in the narcissist's mind - being unable to
manipulate them literally means losing it (his mind). Imagine, if you
suddenly were to find out that you cannot manipulate your memories or
control your thoughts... Nightmarish!

Moreover, it is often only through manipulation and extortion that the
narcissist can secure his Narcissistic Supply. Controlling his Sources
of Narcissistic Supply is a (mental) life or death question for the
narcissist. The narcissist is a drug addict (his drug being the NS) and
he would go to any length to obtain the next dose.

In his frantic efforts to maintain control or re-assert it, the
narcissist resorts to a myriad of fiendishly inventive stratagems and
mechanisms. Here is a partial list:

Unpredictability

The narcissist acts unpredictably, capriciously, inconsistently and
irrationally. This serves to demolish in others their carefully crafted
worldview. They become dependent upon the next twist and turn of the
narcissist, his inexplicable whims, his outbursts, denial, or smiles.
In other words: the narcissist makes sure that HE is the only stable
entity in the lives of others - by shattering the rest of their world
through his seemingly insane behaviour. He guarantees his presence in
their lives - by destabilising them.

In the absence of a self, there are no likes or dislikes, preferences,
predictable behaviour or characteristics. It is not possible to know
the narcissist. There is no one there.

The narcissist was conditioned - from an early age of abuse and trauma
- to expect the unexpected. His was a world in which (sometimes
sadistic) capricious caretakers and peers often behaved arbitrarily. He
was trained to deny his True Self and nurture a False one.

Having invented himself, the narcissist sees no problem in re-inventing
that which he designed in the first place. The narcissist is his own
creator.

Hence his grandiosity.

Moreover, the narcissist is a man for all seasons, forever adaptable,
constantly imitating and emulating, a human sponge, a perfect mirror, a
chameleon, a non-entity that is, at the same time, all entities
combined. The narcissist is best described by Heidegger's phrase:
"Being and Nothingness". Into this reflective vacuum, this sucking
black hole, the narcissist attracts the Sources of his Narcissistic
Supply.

To an observer, the narcissist appears to be fractured or discontinuous.

Pathological narcissism has been compared to the Dissociative Identity
Disorder (formerly the Multiple Personality Disorder). By definition,
the narcissist has at least two selves, the True and False ones. His
personality is very primitive and disorganised. Living with a
narcissist is a nauseating experience not only because of what he is -
but because of what he is NOT. He is not a fully formed human - but a
dizzyingly kaleidoscopic gallery of ephemeral images, which melt into
each other seamlessly. It is incredibly disorienting.

It is also exceedingly problematic. Promises made by the narcissist are
easily disowned by him. His plans are transient. His emotional ties - a
simulacrum. Most narcissists have one island of stability in their life
(spouse, family, their career, a hobby, their religion, country, or
idol) - pounded by the turbulent currents of a dishevelled existence.

The narcissist does not keep agreements, does not adhere to laws,
regards consistency and predictability as demeaning traits.

Thus, to invest in a narcissist is a purposeless, futile and
meaningless activity. To the narcissist, every day is a new beginning,
a hunt, a new cycle of idealisation or devaluation, a newly invented
self. There is no accumulation of credits or goodwill because the
narcissist has no past and no future. He occupies an eternal and
timeless present. He is a fossil caught in the frozen ashes of a
volcanic childhood.

What to do?

Refuse to accept such behaviour. Demand reasonably predictable and
rational actions and reactions. Insist on respect for your boundaries,
predilections, preferences, and priorities.

Disproportional Reactions

One of the favourite tools of manipulation in the narcissist's arsenal
is the disproportionality of his reactions. He reacts with supreme rage
to the slightest slight. He punishes severely for what he perceives to
be an offence against him, no matter how minor. He throws a temper
tantrum over any discord or disagreement, however gently and
considerately expressed. Or he may act attentive, charming and tempting
(even over-sexed, if need be). This ever-shifting code of conduct
coupled with an inordinately harsh and arbitrarily applied "penal code"
are both promulgated by the narcissist. Neediness and dependence on the
source of all justice meted - on the narcissist - are thus guaranteed.

What to do?

Demand a just and proportional treatment. Reject or ignore unjust and
capricious behaviour.

If you are up to the inevitable confrontation, react in kind. Let him
taste some of his own medicine.

Dehumanisation and Objectification

People have a need to believe in the empathic skills and basic
good-heartedness of others. By dehumanising and objectifying people -
the narcissist attacks the very foundations of the social treaty. This
is the "alien" aspect of narcissists - they may be excellent imitations
of fully formed adults but they are emotionally non-existent, or, at
best, immature.

This is so horrid, so repulsive, so phantasmagoric - that people recoil
in terror. It is then, with their defences absolutely down, that they
are the most susceptible and vulnerable to the narcissist's control.
Physical, psychological, verbal and sexual abuse are all forms of
dehumanisation and objectification.

What to do?

Never show your abuser that you are afraid of him. Do not negotiate
with bullies. They are insatiable. Do not succumb to blackmail.

If things get rough- disengage, involve law enforcement officers,
friends and colleagues, or threaten him (legally).

Do not keep your abuse a secret. Secrecy is the abuser's weapon.

Never give him a second chance. React with your full arsenal to the
first transgression.

Abuse of Information

From the first moments of an encounter with another person, the
narcissist is on the prowl. He collects information with the intention
of applying it later to extract Narcissistic Supply. The more he knows
about his potential Source of Supply - the better able he is to coerce,
manipulate, charm, extort or convert it "to the cause". The narcissist
does not hesitate to abuse the information he gleaned, regardless of
its intimate nature or the circumstances in which he obtained it. This
is a powerful tool in his armoury.

What to do?

Be guarded. Don't be too forthcoming in a first or casual meeting.
Gather intelligence.

Be yourself. Don't misrepresent your wishes, boundaries, preferences,
priorities, and red lines.

Do not behave inconsistently. Do not go back on your word. Be firm and
resolute.

Impossible Situations

The narcissist engineers impossible, dangerous, unpredictable,
unprecedented, or highly specific situations in which he is sorely and
indispensably needed. The narcissist, his knowledge, his skills or his
traits become the only ones applicable, or the most useful to coping
with these artificial predicaments. It is a form of control by proxy.

What to do?

Stay away from such quagmires. Scrutinize every offer and suggestion,
no matter how innocuous.

Prepare backup plans. Keep others informed of your whereabouts and
appraised of your situation.

Be vigilant and doubting. Do not be gullible and suggestible. Better
safe than sorry.

Control by Proxy

If all else fails, the narcissist recruits friends, colleagues, mates,
family members, the authorities, institutions, neighbours, or the media
- in short, third parties - to do his bidding. He uses them to cajole,
coerce, threaten, stalk, offer, retreat, tempt, convince, harass,
communicate and otherwise manipulate his target. He controls these
unaware instruments exactly as he plans to control his ultimate prey.
He employs the same mechanisms and devices. And he dumps his props
unceremoniously when the job is done.

Another form of control by proxy is to engineer situations in which
abuse is inflicted upon another person. Such carefully crafted
scenarios involve embarrassment and humiliation as well as social
sanctions (condemnation, opprobrium, or even physical punishment).
Society, or a social group become the instruments of the narcissist.

What to do?

Often the abuser's proxies re unaware of their role. Expose him. Inform
them. Demonstrate to them how they are being abused, misused, and plain
used by the abuser.

Trap your abuser. Treat him as he treats you. Involve others. Bring it
into the open. Nothing like sunshine to disinfest abuse.

Ambient Abuse

The fostering, propagation and enhancement of an atmosphere of fear,
intimidation, instability, unpredictability and irritation. There are
no acts of traceable or provable explicit abuse, nor any manipulative
settings of control. Yet, the irksome feeling remains, a disagreeable
foreboding, a premonition, a bad omen. This is sometimes called
"gaslighting". In the long-term, such an environment erodes one's sense
of self-worth and self-esteem. Self-confidence is shaken badly. Often,
the victims go a paranoid or schizoid and thus are exposed even more to
criticism and judgement. The roles are thus reversed: the victim is
considered mentally disordered and the narcissist - the suffering soul.

What to do?

Run! Get away! Ambient abuse often develops to overt and violent abuse.

You don't owe anyone an explanation - but you owe yourself a life. Bail
out.

The Malignant Optimism of the Abused

I often come across sad examples of the powers of self-delusion that
the narcissist provokes in his victims. It is what I call "malignant
optimism". People refuse to believe that some questions are unsolvable,
some diseases incurable, some disasters inevitable. They see a sign of
hope in every fluctuation. They read meaning and patterns into every
random occurrence, utterance, or slip. They are deceived by their own
pressing need to believe in the ultimate victory of good over evil,
health over sickness, order over disorder. Life appears otherwise so
meaningless, so unjust and so arbitrary...

So, they impose upon it a design, progress, aims, and paths. This is
magical thinking.

"If only he tried hard enough", "If he only really wanted to heal", "If
only we found the right therapy", "If only his defences were down",
"There MUST be something good and worthy under the hideous facade", "NO
ONE can be that evil and destructive", "He must have meant it
differently", "God, or a higher being, or the spirit, or the soul is
the solution and the answer to our prayers".

The Pollyanna defences of the abused against the emerging and horrible
understanding that humans are specks of dust in a totally indifferent
universe, the playthings of evil and sadistic forces, of which the
narcissist is one. And that finally their pain means nothing to anyone
but themselves. Nothing whatsoever. It has all been in vain.

The narcissist holds such thinking in barely undisguised contempt. To
him, it is a sign of weakness, the scent of prey, a gaping
vulnerability. He uses and abuses this human need for order, good, and
meaning - as he uses and abuses all other human needs. Gullibility,
selective blindness, malignant optimism - these are the weapons of the
beast. And the abused are hard at work to provide it with its arsenal.

THE AUTHOR

Shmuel (Sam) Vaknin

Curriculum Vitae

Born in 1961 in Qiryat-Yam, Israel.

Served in the Israeli Defence Force (1979-1982) in training and
education units.

Education

Graduated a few semesters in the Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology, Haifa.

Ph.D. in Philosophy (major: Philosophy of Physics) - Pacific Western
University, California, USA.

Graduate of numerous courses in Finance Theory and International
Trading.

Certified E-Commerce Concepts Analyst.

Certified in Psychological Counselling Techniques.

Full proficiency in Hebrew and in English.

Business Experience

1980 to 1983

Founder and co-owner of a chain of computerised information kiosks in
Tel-Aviv, Israel.

1982 to 1985

Senior positions with the Nessim D. Gaon Group of Companies in Geneva,
Paris and New-York (NOGA and APROFIM SA):

- Chief Analyst of Edible Commodities in the Group's Headquarters in
Switzerland

- Manager of the Research and Analysis Division

- Manager of the Data Processing Division

- Project Manager of the Nigerian Computerised Census

- Vice President in charge of RND and Advanced Technologies

- Vice President in charge of Sovereign Debt Financing

1985 to 1986

Represented Canadian Venture Capital Funds in Israel.

1986 to 1987

General Manager of IPE Ltd. in London. The firm financed international
multi-lateral counter-trade and leasing transactions.

1988 to 1990

Co-founder and Director of "Mikbats-Tesuah", a portfolio management
firm based in Tel-Aviv.

Activities included large-scale portfolio management, underwriting,
forex trading and general financial advisory services.

1990 to Present

Freelance consultant to many of Israel's Blue-Chip firms, mainly on
issues related to the capital markets in Israel, Canada, the UK and the
USA.

Consultant to foreign RND ventures and to Governments on macro-economic
matters.

President of the Israel chapter of the Professors World Peace Academy
(PWPA) and (briefly) Israel representative of the "Washington Times".

1993 to 1994

Co-owner and Director of many business enterprises:

- The Omega and Energy Air-Conditioning Concern

- AVP Financial Consultants

- Handiman Legal Services - Total annual turnover of the group: 10
million USD.

Co-owner, Director and Finance Manager of COSTI Ltd. - Israel's largest
computerised information vendor and developer. Raised funds through a
series of private placements locally, in the USA, Canada and London.

1993 to 1996

Publisher and Editor of a Capital Markets Newsletter distributed by
subscription only to dozens of subscribers countrywide.

In a legal precedent in 1995 - studied in business schools and law
faculties across Israel - was tried for his role in an attempted
take-over of Israel's Agriculture Bank.

Was interned in the State School of Prison Wardens.

Managed the Central School Library, wrote, published and lectured on
various occasions.

Managed the Internet and International News Department of an Israeli
mass media group, "Ha-Tikshoret and Namer".

Assistant in the Law Faculty in Tel-Aviv University (to Prof. S.G.
Shoham).

1996 to 1999

Financial consultant to leading businesses in Macedonia, Russia and the
Czech Republic. Collaborated with the Agency of Transformation of
Business with Social Capital.

Economic commentator in "Nova Makedonija", "Dnevnik", "Makedonija
Denes", "Izvestia", "Argumenti i Fakti", "The Middle East Times", "The
New Presence", "Central Europe Review" and other periodicals, and in
the economic programs on various channels of Macedonian Television.

Chief Lecturer in courses organised by the Agency of Transformation, by
the Macedonian Stock Exchange and Ministry of Trade.

1999 to 2002

Economic Advisor to the Government of the Republic of Macedonia and to
the Ministry of Finance.

2001 to Present

Senior Business Correspondent for United Press International (UPI).

Web and Journalistic Activities:

Author of extensive Web sites in:

- Psychology ("Malignant Self-Love") - An Open Directory Cool Site

- Philosophy ("Philosophical Musings")

- Economics and Geopolitics ("World in Conflict and Transition").

Owner of the Narcissistic Abuse Announcement and Study List and the
Narcissism Revisited mailing list (more than 3900 members).

Owner of the Economies in Conflict and Transition Study List.

Editor of mental health disorders and Central and Eastern Europe
categories in Web directories (Open Directory, Suite 101, Search
Europe).

Columnist and commentator in "The New Presence", United Press
International (UPI), InternetContent, eBookWeb, PopMatters, and
"Central Europe Review".

Publications and Awards

"Managing Investment Portfolios in States of Uncertainty", Limon
Publishers, Tel Aviv, 1988

"The Gambling Industry", Limon Publishers, Tel Aviv, 1990

"Requesting my Loved One - Short Stories", Yedioth Aharonot, Tel Aviv,
1997

"The Suffering of Being Kafka" (electronic book of Hebrew Short
Fiction), 1998

"The Macedonian Economy at a Crossroads - On the Way to a Healthier
Economy", (Dialogues with Mr. Nikola Gruevski), Skopje, 1998

"The Exporters' Pocketbook", Ministry of Trade, Republic of Macedonia,
Skopje, 1999

"Malignant Self-Love - Narcissism Revisited", Narcissus Publications,
Prague and Skopje, 1999, 2001, 2003

The Narcissism Series - e-books regarding relationships with abusive
narcissists, Skopje, 1999-2002

"After the Rain - How the West Lost the East", Narcissus Publications
in association with Central Europe Review / CEENMI, Prague and Skopje,
2000

Winner of numerous awards, among them the Israeli Education Ministry
Prize (Literature) - 1997, The Rotary Club Award for Social Studies -
1976, and the Bilateral Relations Studies Award of the American Embassy
in Israel - 1978.

Hundreds of professional articles in all fields of finances and the
economy, and numerous articles dealing with geopolitical and political
economic issues published in both print and Web periodicals in many
countries.

Many appearances in the electronic media on subjects in philosophy and
the sciences and concerning economic matters.

Write to Me:

palma@unet.com.mk

narcissisticabuse-owner@yahoogroups.com

My Web Sites:

Economy / Politics:

http://ceeandbalkan.tripod.com/

Psychology:

http://samvak.tripod.com/index.html

Philosophy:

http://philosophos.tripod.com/

Poetry:

http://samvak.tripod.com/contents.html

Malignant Self Love

Narcissism Revisited

The Book

"Narcissists live in a state of constant rage, repressed

aggression, envy and hatred. They firmly believe that

everyone is like them. As a result, they are paranoid,

aggressive, haughty and erratic. Narcissists are

forever in pursuit of Narcissistic Supply.

They know no past or future, are not constrained by any

behavioural consistency, 'rules' of conduct or moral

considerations. You signal to a narcissist that you are a willing

source - and he is bound to extract his supply from you.

This is a reflex.

He would have reacted absolutely the same to any other

source. If what is needed to obtain supply from you is

intimations of intimacy - he will supply them liberally."

This book is comprised of two parts.

The first part is an exposition of the various psychodynamic

theories regarding pathological narcissism and

a proposed new vocabulary.

The second part contains 99 Frequently Asked Questions related

to the various aspects of pathological narcissism,

relationships with abusive narcissists, and the

Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD).

The Author

Sam Vaknin was born in Israel in 1961. A financial consultant

and columnist, he lived (and published) in 11 countries.

He is a published and awarded author of short fiction and

reference and an editor of mental health categories in various

Web directories. This is his twelfth book.






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, MALIGNANT SELF LOVE ***

This file should be named malsl11.txt or malsl11.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, malsl12.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, malsl11a.txt

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext05 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext05

Or /etext04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92,
91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

 PROJECT GUTENBERG LITERARY ARCHIVE FOUNDATION
 809 North 1500 West
 Salt Lake City, UT 84116

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**
(Three Pages)

***START** SMALL PRINT! for COPYRIGHT PROTECTED EBOOKS ***

TITLE AND COPYRIGHT NOTICE:

Copyright (C) 2003 by Lidija Rangelovska.
Malignant Self Love, by Sam Vaknin


This eBook is distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart through the
Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project") under the "Project
Gutenberg" trademark and with the permission of the eBook's
copyright owner.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.


LICENSE
You can (and are encouraged!) to copy and distribute this
Project Gutenberg-tm eBook.  Since, unlike many other of the
Project's eBooks, it is copyright protected, and since the
materials and methods you use will effect the Project's reputation,
your right to copy and distribute it is limited by the copyright
laws and by the conditions of this "Small Print!" statement.

  [A]  ALL COPIES: You may distribute copies of this eBook
electronically or on any machine readable medium now known
or hereafter discovered so long as you:

     (1)  Honor the refund and replacement provisions of this
"Small Print!" statement; and

     (2)  Pay a royalty to the Foundation of 20% of the gross
profits you derive calculated using the method you already use
to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you don't derive
profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are payable to "Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation" within the 60 days
following each date you prepare (or were legally required
to prepare) your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

  [B]  EXACT AND MODIFIED COPIES: The copies you distribute
must either be exact copies of this eBook, including this
Small Print statement, or can be in binary, compressed, mark-
up, or proprietary form (including any form resulting from
word processing or hypertext software), so long as *EITHER*:

     (1)  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
does *not* contain characters other than those intended by the
author of the work, although tilde (~), asterisk (*) and
underline (_) characters may be used to convey punctuation
intended by the author, and additional characters may be used
to indicate hypertext links; OR

     (2)  The eBook is readily convertible by the reader at no
expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent form by the
program that displays the eBook (as is the case, for instance,
with most word processors); OR

     (3)  You provide or agree to provide on request at no
additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the eBook in plain
ASCII.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
This eBook may contain a "Defect" in the form of incomplete,
inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other infringement, a defective or damaged disk, computer
virus, or codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.  But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund"
described below, the Project (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook)
disclaims all liability to you for damages, costs and
expenses, including legal fees, and YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR
NEGLIGENCE OR UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF
WARRANTY OR CONTRACT, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT,
CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU
GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of
implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of
consequential damages, so the above disclaimers and exclusions
may not apply to you, and you may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart and the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com


*SMALL PRINT! Ver.03.17.02 FOR COPYRIGHT PROTECTED EBOOKS*END*
